How to Read
A
PROFIT AND LOSS
STATEMENT
Tata McGraw Hill Professional: Finance Made Easy Series
Tata McGraw Hill Professional: Finance Made Easy Series
Financial success is the raison d’être of any business, and fi nancial health
of any organization is refl ected in its fi nancial statements. But, it has been
observed that managerial professionals often have little understanding of
fi nance and little time to read treatises on it. Further, fi nancial statements
are regarded as too complex to understand and left to be ‘deciphered’ by
fi nance experts. Hence, cultivating a culture of awareness and transparency
of fi nance is a prime imperative.
Finance Made Easy Series has been designed to impart management
executives with adequate knowledge to understand and appreciate fi nancial
statements and their implications for the fi scal solvency of their fi rms. Th is
series seeks to demystify apparently complex fi nancial statements, and
help create a fi nance-savvy executive class, the key to fi scally sound and
successful businesses. A lucid, creative and concise exposition of fi nancial
statements—their components, jargon and computational methods—
with short stories and numerical examples makes for an engaging reading
for busy professionals.
Titles in the series include:
• How to Read a Balance Sheet
• How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
• How to Read a Cash Flow Statement
and many more…
McGraw-Hill Offi ces
New Delhi New York St Louis San Francisco Auckland Bogotá Caracas
Kuala Lumpur Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City Milan Montreal
San Juan Santiago Singapore Sydney Tokyo Toronto
Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Limited
NEW DELHI
N. Ramachandran
Principal Consultant
Management Advisory Services
Kochi
Ram Kumar Kakani
Associate Professor, XLRI
Jamshedpur
How to Read
A
PROFIT AND LOSS
STATEMENT
Tata McGraw Hill Professional: Finance Made Easy Series
Published by Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited,
7 West Patel Nagar, New Delhi 110 008.
Copyright © 2010, by Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise or stored in a
database or retrieval system without the prior written permission of the publishers. The
program listings (if any) may be entered, stored and executed in a computer system,
but they may not be reproduced for publication.
This edition can be exported from India only by the publishers,
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited.
ISBN (13): 978-0-07-068019-7
ISBN (10): 0-07-068019-1
Managing Director: Ajay Shukla
Head—Professional and Healthcare: Roystan La’Porte
Executive Publisher—Professional: R Chandra Sekhar
Asst. Sponsoring Editor—BGR: Dipankar Das
Production Executive: Rita Sarkar
Manager—Sales & Marketing: S Girish
Sr. Product Specialist—BGR: Priyanka Goel
General Manager—Production: Rajender P Ghansela
Asst. General Manager—Production: B L Dogra
Information contained in this work has been obtained by Tata McGraw Hill,
from sources believed to be reliable. However, neither Tata McGraw Hill nor
its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information published
herein, and neither Tata McGraw Hill nor its authors shall be responsible for
any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this information. This
work is published with the understanding that Tata McGraw Hill and its authors
are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other
professional services. If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate
professional should be sought.
Typeset at Tact Computer Graphics, A-118, St. No. 6, West Azad Nagar, Krishna
Nagar, Delhi 110 051, and printed at Rashtriya printers, M-135, Panchsheel Garden,
Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110 032
Cover Design: Kapil Gupta, New Delhi
RCDCRDDZRXLRZ
The McGraw-Hill Companies
To
Our Teachers
Fi
nancial success is arguably the primary purpose around which all
business management activities revolve. Th is brings an imperative need
to promote a culture of fi nancial discipline throughout an organization.
In order to build an economically viable company, employees in all
the departments need to understand the ramifi cations of their actions
on the overall fi scal health of the organization. For this to happen it is
very important that not only the fi nance managers, but also managers in
all other fi elds have an adequate understanding and appreciation of the
subject. Th e pervasiveness of such an understanding may ultimately prove
to be the diff erence between a successful and a bankrupt organization.
Th e series of books, Finance Made Easy, has been written to impart
management executives with the knowledge that they would require in
order to understand basic fi nancial statements. Th e series is an attempt at
breaking the myth that fi nancial statements like profi t and loss statement,
cash fl ow statement and balance sheet are too complex to comprehend.
Th is particular book deals with the profi t and loss statement. Th e
primary purpose of a business enterprise is to generate profi ts for its
owners. Th e profi t and loss statement conveys the profi tability of the
business. It is by looking at this statement, that we gauge the success of a
business. It also provides us insights on the improvements that need to be
made to further enhance a fi rm’s profi tability.
Hence, it becomes necessary for all the stakeholders of a business to
have some rudimentary knowledge about the statement and the impact it
Preface
has on the business. It is with some confi dence that we claim this book is
your ideal guide in getting you to that point. Th e readers will appreciate
the simple language in which this book is written so as to reduce all the
unnecessary fi nancial jargons and present the concepts in a very easily
comprehensible format.
Readers are welcome to share their feedback by writing to
ramkumarkakani@gmail.com
NEELAKANTAN RAMACHANDRAN
RAM KUMAR KAKANI
viii Preface
We
would like to thank all the colleagues and students who have
contributed to the manuscript development. We are especially indebted
to:
􀀁 Azad Purohit, CA
􀀁 D Rama Rao, MBA
􀀁 Kamlesh Kumar Th akkar, CA
􀀁 Nutan Shashi Tigga, MA
􀀁 PBS Srinivas, B.Tech
􀀁 Rohit N Barchha, CAI
􀀁 Suyash Kumar Tiwary, MCA
We would like to thank Dipankar Das, Rita Sarkar, Ullas Sindhu and
other team members of the Tata McGraw Hill Professional. In particular,
we thank R. Chandra Sekhar, whose skillful persuasion and editorial work
has helped improve and bring clarity to this book enormously.
NEELAKANTAN RAMACHANDRAN
RAM KUMAR KAKANI
Acknowledgments
Preface vii
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction 1
1. Th e Income Statement — An Introduction 3
Profi t and Loss Statement 4
Importance of Income Statement 8
2. Accounting Principles 9
Accounting Period 10
3. Measurement of Income 18
Revenue 19
Expenses 20
Classifi cation 21
Diff erent Account Period Items 23
4. Preparation of Income Statement 25
Account 25
Various Types of Profi t 30
Form and Contents of Profi t and Loss Account 34
Non-operating Income/Other Income 39
Contents
xii Contents
5. Income Statement and Balance Sheet 47
6. Inventory Valuation 53
First In First Out (FIFO) 52
Last In First Out (LIFO) 53
Weighted Average Cost (WAC) 54
7. Income Statement of a Manufacturing Concern 61
Manufacturing Account 61
Trading Account 64
8. Possible Future Expenses 66
Bad Debt Expense 66
9. Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 70
Methods of Depreciation 72
Intangible Assets and Amortization 78
Depletion 79
Depreciation and Profi t Measurement 79
Diff erence: Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 81
10. Solved Illustrations 82
Summary and Exercises 93
Index 103
The primary motive of running a business enterprise (say, Google Inc.)
is income. Th e profi ts are the compensation derived by an entrepreneur
for the capital invested and risks incurred in running a fi rm (think of the
reasons for the existence of Google and its benefi ts to its owners). Profi ts
earned are also one of the chief indicators of the effi ciency of a business
concern. Yes, owners of Google Inc. would be happier with a high-profi t
fi rm than a non-profi t making fi rm. Hence, it is of utmost importance
that each and every employee of a company understands the role that the
need for income plays in shaping the decisions of a concern.
A person without or with little some understanding of calculation and
projection of income (returns) would have a tough time in contributing
anything of value to strategic organizational decisions. If you are an HR
head/manager or a production manager who does not understand the
fi nancial underpinnings that drive organizational decisions, you will not
be in a position to add the value required at the executive team level. In
order to calculate the amount of profi ts (or loss) of a fi rm, a statement is
prepared by the fi nancial managers of an entity. Th is Income Statement is
also known as Profi t and Loss Account (P&L Account).
Introduction

The law requires companies to compulsorily prepare two statements:
􀀁 Th e Balance Sheet
􀀁 Th e Income Statement
Th ese perhaps, are the most important and relevant credentials for an
enterprise to refl ect its fi nancial performance. While we have discussed
the balance sheet in an earlier book titled ‘How to read a Balance Sheet’,
we will be elaborating on the income statement and its relationship with
the balance sheet in this book.
Due to the primacy of income and the role played by it in shaping
the decisions of a fi rm, a detailed analysis is required to understand the
components that infl uence it. Th e need for information in this regard is
addressed by preparing a detailed statement summarizing the increases and
decreases in income, caused by revenues and expenses during the accounting
period. Yes, an income statement is a statement dedicated exclusively to
summarizing this!
An income statement uses a simple mechanism to come up with
the fi nal profi t or loss fi gure at the end of an accounting period. All the
revenues and expenses of a particular period are put together, categorized,
and presented in an orderly fashion. Th e diff erence between these two
components is either profi t, in case revenues are more than expenses; or loss,
in case expenses are more than revenues. Mentioned below is a very simple
defi nition of the profi t and loss statement.
The Income Statement — An
Introduction
1
C H A P T E R
4 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Profit and Loss Statement
An orderly list of all the revenues and all the expenses at the end of the
fi nancial period. Th e diff erence between revenues and expenses gives an
estimate of the profi t or loss of the period, i.e., the net earnings of the business
Th e following are some new terms that we came across in the defi nition:
Revenue
Th is is the total amount of money received or to be received by a company
for goods or services it provided during a certain time period. So, for
example, if a fi rm sells laptops worth Rs. 2,000,000 and also renders
maintenance services to a fi rm for Rs. 500,000, then the total revenue of
the company would be Rs. 2,500,000.
Expenses
Expenses are referred to as the costs incurred in producing revenue by a
company. Continuing with the previous example, if the fi rm incurred Rs.
1,200,000 as the cost of manufacturing the laptops and paid Rs. 200,000
to the mechanic for repairing them, then the total costs incurred by the
fi rm would be Rs. 1,400,000.
Th e subsequent sections of the book will deal with revenues and
expenses in much more detail.
Box 1.1 Costs and Expenses
Bholuram: Hey Finnova, you have used the word ‘expenses’
above. What is the difference between ‘costs’ and ‘expenses’?
Finnova: Good question, Bholu. Although, many a times
the words are used synonymously (we’ll also use the two
interchangeably in some places), there is a subtle difference
The Income Statement — An Introduction 5
Let us now take a very simple example to understand the basic concept
of profi t and loss.
Example 1: Bala
Bala is a popular dosawala who prepares and sells hot mouth watering dosas
(aka dosai) outside a big management school. He is always busy and registers a
large amount of sale. A few days back, Bala got an off er to work for a big city
caterer who has off ered him a salary of Rs. 5,000 per month. Being illiterate
Bala has never been able to calculate the profi ts from his dosa business. With
this new job off er, he is confused and is unable to ascertain as to which of
between the two terms. Costs refer to all the outlays of
the company. The company may pay for items such as,
purchasing land, purchasing raw materials, paying salary to
staff, paying for electricity, etc. All these items will be refered
to as costs of the company. Expenses on the other hand refer
to that portion of costs which is incurred by the company in
some revenue generating activity. Let us illustrate with the
help of an example. Suppose you need to supply 100 pens to
a company. For that you need plastic as raw material. Now,
instead of buying plastic to manufacture 100 pens, you buy
enough to manufacture 1,500 pens. You do this for future
orders and also to ensure that you do not run out of plastic
(raw material stock). Now, you used plastic for only 100 pens,
while the rest is still kept in your godown as raw material
inventory. In this case, the money spent on buying plastics
for 100 pens can only be termed as expenses as only that
part of your money was used towards a revenue generating
activity that is selling of pens, while the money spent on
the entire 1,500 pens is your cost. In future, however, when
you decide to manufacture the remaining 1,400 pens, those
costs will also become your expenses.
Bholuram: That is cool Finnova! Let me think of a few costs
in my fi rm that’ll become expenses later. The cost incurred
by you on the coffee and samosa that you gave me yesterday
must have already become an expense.
6 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
the options (his business or the new job) will give him a better return. He
approached one of the management students, Miss Amrapalli for help.
Amrapalli asked Bala the following two questions:
1. What are the monthly sales of your dosa business (in other words,
what is your revenue)?
2. What expenses do you incur in your business?
Bala replied:
Th ese are the total sales that I make in a month:
􀀁 240 cheese dosas which I sell for Rs. 22 each
􀀁 300 plain dosas which I sell for Rs. 11 each
􀀁 280 masala dosas which I sell for Rs. 20 each
Th en Bala listed all his expenses as under.
􀀁 Dosa paste: Rs. 4 for each piece of all dosa (includes all types)
􀀁 Oil: Re 1 for each piece of dosa (includes all types)
􀀁 Cheese: Rs. 5 for each piece of cheese dosa
􀀁 Masala: Rs. 7 for each piece of masala dosa
􀀁 Rent: Rs. 1,000 per month
Amrapalli quickly did some calculations to fi nd out the total revenues
for the dosawala and listed them on one side of a blank paper (see Table
1.1). Th e paper looked somewhat like this:
Table 1.1 Total Monthly Revenues of Bala
Item (1) Pieces (2) Selling price per
piece (Rs.)
(3)
Total revenue
(Rs.)
(2) * (3)
Cheese dosa 240 Rs. 22 Rs. 5,280
Plain dosa 300 Rs. 11 Rs. 3,300
Masala dosa 280 Rs. 20 Rs. 5,600
Total 820 Rs. 14,180
The Income Statement — An Introduction 7
Th en, on another piece of paper, Amrapalli listed all the expenses of
Bala (see Table 1.2). Th ey looked somewhat like this:
Table 1.2 Total Monthly Expenses of Bala
Item (1) Pieces (2) Cost price per piece
(Rs.)
(3)
Total cost
(Rs.)
(2) * (3)
Dosa paste 820 Rs. 4 Rs. 3,280
Oil 820 Re. 1 Rs. 820
Cheese 240 Rs. 5 Rs. 1,200
Masala 280 Rs. 7 Rs. 1,960
Rent – – Rs. 1,000
Total 2,160 Rs. 8,260
Being a very systematic management student, Amrapalli now listed
all the revenues on the right side and the costs on the left side to get
a better comparison of the revenues and expenses. Table 1.3 shows this
statement.
Table 1.3 Total Revenues and Expenses of Bala
Expenses Amount (Rs.) Revenues Amount (Rs.)
Dosa paste 3,280 Cheese dosa 5,280
Oil 820 Plain dosa 3,300
Cheese 1,200 Masala dosa 5,600
Masala 1,960
Rent 1,000
Profi t (Revenues
less costs)
5,920
Total 14,180 Total 14,180
Now we see that the total revenues listed on the right side come to
Rs. 14,180. At the same time, the total costs sum up to Rs. 8,260. Th e
diff erence between both these items, that is, the revenues and the costs
is equal to Rs. 5,920 (Rs. 14,180 – Rs. 8,260) is the profi t for Bala, also
8 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
known as net income. Th is fi gure is greater than Rs. 5,000 which was
being off ered by the catering company. Th us, Bala decided to stay in the
campus and carry on with the existing business.
Th e last statement that we just saw was nothing but the income
statement for Bala, the dosawala, whereby, we listed his total revenues and
total costs to eventually come up with the profi ts earned by him.
Importance of Income Statement
Management and owners, while looking at their business during a period,
are interested in getting answers to a few mundane questions such as:
􀀁 Was it a good year or a bad year for the business?
􀀁 What was the volume of operations?
􀀁 What was the margin available on sales?
􀀁 How was each rupee from sales distributed among the diff erent expense
items and profi t?
All these questions cannot be answered with a balance sheet.
Answering the above questions would need an additional financial
statement addressed exclusively to summarize the revenue and expenses
of a particular period. Th is statement is what is referred to variously as the
Income Statement, the Income Summary, the Profi t and Loss Account or the
Profi t and Loss Summary. Th ough a profi t and loss statement of a company
can have a number of uses, the primary uses can be listed as under:
􀀁 It informs the stakeholders of the profi ts of the company for a particular
period.
􀀁 It off ers a comparison with the performance in the past and informs
them of the company’s progress.
􀀁 It helps them to predict the future profi ts of the company.
􀀁 It informs them of the profi t margins maintained by the business.
􀀁 It tells them of the composition of the expenses of the company and
identify cost cutting measures.
􀀁 It off ers a comparison with other companies of the same industry.
While preparing the accounts of a company, one comes across
a number of alternatives with regards to accounting for certain items.
Presence of such alternatives brings about a certain amount of ambiguity
in the financial statements of a company. While dealing with the
preparation of income statement too, there may be situations where more
than one way of dealing with a component is possible. For example, if an
order is received in one year (say, 2007), delivery for the good is made in
the next year (say, 2008), and payment is received in the third year (say,
2009), then there may be confusion with respect to the year for which
such revenue should be recorded.
In order to minimize such uncertainties, a number of principles
or rules are framed which guide the accountant with respect to the
steps to be taken in presence of vagueness. Th ese principles form the
basis on which the accounts of a company are prepared. Th ese tell the
accountant the specifi c ways in which a particular component should
be dealt with.
Moving ahead, we fi rst discuss what we mean by the term accounting
period, following which, we list some of the most widely accepted
principles with regards to the profi t and loss account of a company.
Accounting Principles
2
C H A P T E R
10 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Accounting Period
Accounting period is commonly referred as the ‘fi nancial year’ for which
we make the fi nancial statements of a business entity, that is, a balance
sheet and an income statement. Th e readers might have observed that
most companies follow either April 1–March 31, or January 1–December
31 as their accounting periods. But these accounting periods should not
be considered as a compulsion by law (or accounting bodies). Th ese are
followed more as a matter of past convention and convenience. Th ough
rare, business entities can have accounting periods of less than or more
than 12 months. Legally, the maximum period may be of 15 months
which may be extended to 18 months on obtaining special permission
from the Registrar of Companies. In the example of Bala dosawala, the
accounting period was of one month only for preparing Bala’s income
statement. Th e understanding of an accounting period will come in
handy when understanding the basic accounting principles.
Realization Principle
Realization is technically understood as the process of converting a noncash
resource or a right into money. For example, selling of chairs for cash
which has the eff ect of converting non-cash resource, that is, chairs into
money. In terms of accounting, it is more precisely understood to mean
recognition of revenue from sale of assets for cash or other such receivables
such as cheque, promissory notes, etc. As an accounting principle, it is
used to precisely identify the amount of revenue to be recognized and
the amount of expense to be matched to such revenue, for the purpose of
income measurement.
Realization, thus, usually, pertains to the recognition of revenue from
a sale or provision of goods or services to customers. When should we
recognize revenue? Th is is the question that the realization principle tries to
answer. Th ere can be several arguments for and against recognizing revenue
at a particular time, which could be the time when the inventory is acquired,
when the goods are made ready for sale, when the order is received, when
Accounting Principles 11
the goods are delivered, or when the sale proceeds are collected. In order
to avoid such confusion, revenue is generally recognized when goods are
delivered or services are rendered. Th is is done despite the fact that delivery is
only one of a series of events related to the sale. Th e rationale is that delivery
validates or in other words, confi rms a claim against the customer. Th e
customer is set to be obligated to the seller with regards to the payment
for the goods (or services) received.
Th e principle of realization being the point of recognition of revenue
also enables us to have a reference for recognizing the expenses incurred
in making available such goods or services. Th us, the realization principle
facilitates the process of income measurement by identifying revenues
and expenses with respect to such revenues. By implication, if costs are
incurred in producing the goods, unless sales are made, such costs are not
considered as expenses. So, as soon as revenue is recognized, all the costs
which went about realizing that revenue now form part of the expenses.
Th ese costs, which have become part of the expenses, are also known as
expired costs.
To summarize the above discussion, the realization principle implies
the following two major factors:
􀀁 All completed sales transactions of the period and the amounts received
or to be received, with relation to such completed sales transactions
are recognized as revenue of the period. Such sales transactions
are generally taken to be complete only when the goods are
actually delivered or service is rendered.
􀀁 All costs involved in the goods or services transferred to the customer
are recognized as expired costs and are hence, expenses of the
period.
Accrual Principle
Closely related to the realization principle is the accrual principle. Common
sense dictates that measurement of an organization’s income is the most
important use of accounting. Th e managers need to be constantly updated
with the income of their companies. Th e accurate measurement of income
is enhanced via the use of the accrual principle of accountancy.
12 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
What is income? Well, it is essentially a measure of the change in
owner(s) equity over a period of time. One example of a change in the
owners’ equity is that if you go to buy a shirt from a shop, then the cash
balance of the shop and the owner(s) equity will increase by some amount
(say, Rs. 500). Similarly, if a company pays Rs. 1,000 cash towards
purchase of a fan, then the cash balance of the company and its owner(s)
equity will reduce by an amount of Rs. 1,000.
Box 2.1 Owner(s) Equity
However, there will always be cases wherein, revenues and expenses
would not be accompanied by a simultaneous increase/decrease in the
cash position of the fi rm. It may happen that cash relating to the revenue
of a particular period is realized in some other accounting period and cash
relating to a particular expense item is paid out in a diff erent accounting
period. As in the previous example, the company might very well have
paid the Rs. 1,000 it owed towards the purchase of the fan in the next
accounting period. Recording of such non-cash transactions is one of the
basic problems of accounting. We use the accrual principle in order to
deal with these discrepancies.
Bholuram: Hey Finnova! What is Owners’ Equity? And
why have you suddenly raised your pitch?
Finnova: Bholu, now I am convinced that you suffer from
short term memory loss. Don’t you remember that in the
book on Balance Sheet, we defi ned the owners’ equity as
Owners’ Capital + Reserves & Surplus + The Retained
Profi ts of the Business Entity. It essentially gives us the
amount of money that the owners that is shareholders own
in a company. It is important to note that with an increase
in profi ts, the Owners’ Equity will increase, while it will
decrease in case of a loss. Consult your book on Balance
Sheet for further details.
Bholuram: Thank you. Now, I am confi dent that you suffer
from high blood pressure.
Accounting Principles 13
Th e accrual principle in turn takes the help of the most fundamental
accounting equation:
Owner(s) Equity + Liabilities = Assets
According to this principle, the incoming and outgoing of cash is
absolutely immaterial for calculating the income of a period. What the
accountant should be concerned with is whether the transaction has any
eff ect on the owners’ equity and consequently on the equation. Only
those transactions which have an eff ect on the owners’ equity are taken
into consideration when calculating the income of a specifi ed period.
Th us, by maintaining the accounts on an accrual system, a more accurate
estimation of the income of an entity pertaining to that particular
accounting period is observed.
To summarize, the accrual concept states that net income arises from
events that change the owner(s) equity in a specifi ed period and that these
are not necessarily the same as the change in the cash position of the
business.
Th us, realization and accrual together, lay down the ground rule for
the measurement of income.
To better illustrate how these two principles help in the measurement
of income, let us take up the case of Nagma Gupta.
Example 2: Nagma Gupta
Situation 1: Miss Nagma Gupta started her business on July 1. On the same
day, she took a loan of Rs. 1,000,000 from a bank at the rate of 12 percent per
annum for purchasing machinery. Th e machinery has a life of 10 years, with
no scrap value. She also paid Rs. 600,000 as three months’ rent, in advance.
We are required to calculate her expenses for the month of July.
Explanation
Readers will agree that the bank borrowing does not represent
revenue. Th e increase in the cash is off set by an increase in the liabilities,
14 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
whereas, an interest of Rs. 10,000 (computed as monthly charge equals
Rs. 1,000,000 × 12% × 1/12) and a depreciation of Rs. 8,330 (computed
as monthly charge equals Rs. 1,000,000/10 × 1/12) are accrued expenses
in the month of July. Rent expense for the month of July will be Rs.
200,000 only, as the rent has been paid in advance for the months of
August and September.
Situation 2: Nagma had received written orders worth Rs. 2,000,000
in the month of June itself (even before starting her business). She started the
production accordingly. Th e total cost of production was Rs. 1,200,000. Th e
sales of merchandise to her customers, from July 2-31 are as follows:
Total Sales = Rs. 950,000 (cash sales = Rs. 250,000 and credit sales to
Syed Shabbirul Haque = Rs. 700,000)
Explanation
In Situation 2, the revenue is recognized only when the goods are
sold to the customers and not on receiving the order or on incurring the
production cost. So, the total sales during the month of July would be
Rs. 950,000. It is an amount equal to the cash received (Rs. 250,000) and
to be received in the later month (Rs. 700,000). Th us, the accounting
equation would be:
Assets = Liabilities + Owner(s) Equity
Cash + Debtors = Liabilities + Owner(s) Equity
Rs. 250,000 + Rs. 700,000 = Re. 0 + Rs. 950,000
When Syed Shabbirul Haque pays Rs. 700,000 in the next month,
that amount must not be counted for the second time while measuring
the revenue in the month of August. During that period (when cash is
received from Syed Shabbirul Haque), the cash would increase by Rs.
700,000 and the debtors would decrease by the same amount. The
amount of total assets, liabilities and owner(s) equity would remain the
same.
Th e accrual concept plays an important role in the example discussed.
Credit sales to Syed Shabbirul Haque are considered to be revenue earned
Accounting Principles 15
in July, whereas the cash is received in the next month. Th us, the revenue
is of July, when the sale took place, and not when the cash is received1.
Table 2.1 presents the diff erences between the accrual and cash basis
of accounting.
Table 2.1 Accrual System vs Cash System
Basis of
accounting
Accrual basis Cash basis
Revenue When earned When cash is collected
Expenses When incurred When cash is paid
GAAP Compliance Yes No
Example If you were a student
staying in a hostel then your
hostel owner would record
an income event on the
day your hostel rent comes
due (you owe it to him/her).
He/she records an expense
event when he/she owes
the monthly wages to the
servant for maintenance
of your apartment in that
month (he/she owes it to the
agent).
If you were a student
staying in a hostel then your
hostel owner would record
an income event only when
you pay your hostel rent.
Similarly, the hostel owner
records an expense event
when he/she pays the
wages for maintenance of
the apartment.
Users Almost all publicly listed
fi rms such as ACC, HUL,
etc.
Almost all Governments
(central and state), small
vendors such as Tulsi Pan
Shop, etc.
Matching Principle
We agreed earlier that for business enterprises, it is absolutely essential
to measure accurately the income of a particular accounting period.
1Herein, it would be worthwhile to mention that there are some business entities, which still prefer
to maintain their accounts on cash rather than an accrual based system. Th ey compute their income
only on the basis of cash paid and not when there is a change in owner(s) equity. Of course,
most of these entities would have customers with poor payment records (resulting in doubtful
receivables). Typically, small shops and village moneylenders are most prone to maintaining a
cash-based accounting system.
16 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Th is is where the matching principle comes handy. It states that while
calculating the income for a particular accounting period, the costs for
that period should be subtracted or matched, with the revenues of that
period. Th en we would be left with the profi t or loss of the company for
the period. It is this profi t or loss that will get added or subtracted from
the owner(s) equity. So, by matching the revenues and costs of the same
period, a precise measure of the net income (or loss) of that particular
period is made possible by the matching principle.
Assets that Become Expenses
Almost all the assets a business entity owns sooner or later become
expenses, a concept called asset expiration. We also observe a few assets
such as inventories becoming expenses sooner than later. An examination
of some specifi c cases of assets that become expenses will enable us to
understand the idea of asset expirations very clearly.
Inventories
Inventories2 of merchandise become expenses when they are sold. A trader
selling off his inventory is a simple example of inventories becoming
expenses. In case of manufacturing organizations, all the costs incurred on
the transformation of raw materials add value to the inventory. Th ese costs
are treated as expenses only when the inventory in question is sold (based
on the realization and matching principles). Around 20 percent of steel
manufacturing fi rms’ assets are its inventories.
Prepaid Expenses
Prepaid expenses3 represent services or assets paid for, prior to their
actual use. Th us, they represent unexpired costs. Th ey become expenses
2While this topic was introduced in the book How to Read a Balance Sheet, the coverage here is
from the perspective of profi t and loss statement.
3Refer to the book How to Read a Balance Sheet for further study.
Accounting Principles 17
when the services are used or assets are consumed. Railway reservation
tickets purchased a couple of weeks before the actual travel, by a fi rm, is
a good example of a prepaid expense. When the travel dates on the ticket
lapses, the prepaid expense gets converted to an expense. Prepaid rent and
prepaid insurance are other examples of prepaid expenses.
Long-Lived Assets
Fixed assets such as furniture, plant and machinery, and vehicles have a
limited useful life. Th e costs of such assets expire during the life of the
assets in question. Such expiration of the costs of the assets is referred
to as depreciation capturing the decreasing future utility of these assets.
Chapter 6 is entirely devoted to explaining the concept of depreciation.
When you sell an item costing Rs. 7,000 for Rs. 10,000, assuming no
other costs, you earn a profi t of Rs. 3,000. What we have done in arriving
at this conclusion is nothing but a measurement of the net income.
Th is is achieved by comparing the revenue from sales against the cost of
materials parted with for earning that revenue. Th e net diff erence in this
comparison represents net income or profi t.
The simple illustration demonstrates the basic process of profit
measurement. Th is process involves the following steps shown in Fig. 3.1.
First, identify the realized revenues. Second, identify the costs expiring in
relation to those identifi ed revenues. Finally, match the identifi ed revenue
and the expired costs. Th e diff erence arising from this matching is the
profi t (when revenue is higher) or loss (when costs are higher).
Figure 3.1 Measuring Profi t or Net Income
Measurement of Income
3
C H A P T E R
Identify Realized Revenues
Identify Related Costs
Match Identified revenues and expired Costs
The difference arising from the matching is the profit or loss
Measurement of Income 19
Revenue
Revenue may be understood as the total amount of money received or
to be received by a company in return of goods sold or services provided
to some other entity. It also includes earnings from interest, dividend,
rents and other items of income. Furthermore it is referred to as sales or
turnover. It is to be noted that in the accrual system, revenue is a measure
of the total sales/revenue accrued or earned for the period, irrespective
of whether or not any cash is received in lieu of those liabilities.1 If the
right to receive that income is created or the time for which the income
relates has expired, we treat the income as accrued. For example, a credit
sale made during this period, to be collected during the next accounting
period, is an income of this period. Similarly, expiry of date and time for
a non-cancellable hotel booking is an income for the hotel.
Somewhat contrary to the concept of accrued revenue is unearned
revenue. It refers to revenues being pre-received by a company in a
particular accounting period, while it actually pertains to a later accounting
period. For example, if on March 5, 2009, a computer vendor received
Rs. 50,000 as fees for annual maintenance for the period covering April
1, 2009, to March 31, 2010, then the entire income of Rs. 50,000 would
be treated as an advance from customers also popularly known as unearned
revenue. Quite logically, unearned revenue is not regarded as the revenue
of the current period but added to the revenue of the period to which it
relates. In the annual maintenance example, the amount of Rs. 50,000
will be regarded as revenue for the accounting period beginning on April
1, 2009.
Characteristics of Revenue
􀀁 Normally, revenue is generated out of business activities, that is, sale
of goods or rendering of services.
􀀁 Revenue results in an infl ow of assets (cash or receivables) and an
outfl ow of goods or services (cash or payables).
1Th e time of recognition of revenue for companies following the accrual system of accounts will be
diff erent from companies following the cash system of maintaining accounts.
20 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
􀀁 Revenue is usually related to a specifi c period, i.e., revenue of one
year cannot be included as revenue of another year.
􀀁 Revenue leads to an increase in the owner(s) equity.
It is important to note that revenue should not be confused with
profi t or net income. Revenue arises throughout the accounting period by
way of sale of goods or rendering of services, but profi t is to be calculated
at the end of the accounting period. Profi t is calculated by matching
the revenues with the costs that have been expired during the relevant
accounting period, wherein revenues less expenses gives us the profi t for
the period.
Expenses
Expenses are costs incurred and expired in connection with the earning of
revenue. An expense is a sacrifi ce made or resource consumed in relation
to the revenues earned during an accounting period. It is to be noted
that cost and expenses do not mean the same thing. Only costs that
have expired during an accounting period are treated as expense. Costs
incurred do not become expenses until the goods (or service) in question
are exchanged or the accounting period in question is over (please refer to
Box 1.1 to review the concept on Page 4).
Expenses of a given period are:
􀀁 Costs and expenses of the current accounting period. Th ese are costs
incurred during the accounting period, which also expire during the
same period. For example, cost of materials bought and sold during
the same accounting period.
􀀁 Costs incurred in a previous accounting period that become expenses
or expired costs during the current accounting period. For
example, inventory purchased during the previous period, but unsold
during that period and sold during this period. Th e amount of
inventory, which represented unexpired costs and hence, an asset at
the close of the previous accounting period, becomes expired costs
and is treated as an expense during the period in which it is sold.
Measurement of Income 21
􀀁 Expenses of this year, the monetary outlay for which will be made
during a subsequent period. Th ese are also expired costs of the current
period, but the costs are incurred by contracting a liability. For
example, rent which is due for the current accounting period, but is
to be paid in the next accounting period.
As discussed earlier,
Owners’ Equity + Liabilities = Assets
Any transaction that has the eff ect of reducing the assets or increasing
the liabilities, results in a decrease in the owners’ equity. Such a transaction
is treated as expense. For example, rent paid for an amount say, Rs.
5,000 will have the eff ect of decreasing an asset (cash) and consequently,
decreasing the owners’ equity, hence, this Rs. 5,000 will be taken as
expenses for the period.
Classification
All the costs (and expenses) incurred by a business can be grouped into
two broad categories––inventoriable costs and non-inventoriable costs.
Non-inventoriable Costs These are all other costs
incurred during a period, which would not leave behind
any value with the passage of time. Examples of such costs
could be rentals paid for offi ces, interest paid on borrowings
and so on. These are recognized as expenses with the
expiration of the specifi c accounting period.
􀀂􀀂􀀂
􀀂􀀂􀀂
Inventoriable Costs These are all those costs that can
be directly or indirectly, traced or tracked to the goods or
services in question and can be regarded as expiring with
the passing of title to the buyer.
􀀂􀀂􀀂
􀀂􀀂􀀂
22 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Non-inventoriable costs are usually period costs and hence are to be
matched against the revenues of the period. Example 3 will help clear any
confusion with regards to inventoriable and non-inventoriable costs.
Example 3: Maninder Singh
Maninder Singh purchased merchandise worth Rs. 10,000 during the
fi scal year 2009-10. Being adept at business, he sold half the merchandise
during the period for Rs. 7,500. He incurred Rs. 2,000 as warehouse
rent for storage of the merchandise. Now, at the end of the year, it was
time to give a report on the fi nancial health of his business to his father.
Confused with respect to the classification of a number of items, he
called upon Anand Lakhotia to help him. Being good at accountancy,
Anand accurately classifi ed the items on the following basis as depicted in
Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Classifi cation of Items
Item Remarks
Cost of inventory
Rs. 10,000
The purchase prices of the
merchandise.
Increase in owners equity, i.e.,
revenue
Rs. 7,500
The sale proceeds realized in exchange
of one half of the merchandise.
Expenses, i.e., expiration of
inventoriable costs
Rs. 5,000
The cost of the merchandise parted
with or given over to the customer
in exchange for the revenue. The
reduction in owner(s) equity as a result
of reduction of inventory. The cost with
respect to the revenue earned and
hence expired cost.
Expenses, i.e., expiration of noninventoriable
costs
Rs. 2,000
The cost of rent for the facility is a cost
incurred during the period and expiring
during the period, that is, a period cost.
Note here, that the entire cost of Rs.
2,000 is taken as expenses and it is not
apportioned between sold and unsold
inventory.
Ending inventory
Rs. 5,000
The unexpired cost and hence an
asset. A merchandise inventory as a
convention is valued at cost.
Measurement of Income 23
Different Account Period Items
We can observe that there are the two following ways by which the
cash paid and the expenses related to (the cash paid), occur in diff erent
accounting periods:
1. Cash is paid prior to the incurrence of expense. In this case, at the time
of payment of cash, an asset, classifi ed as prepaid expense is created, an
example of which would be prepaid rent.
2. Cash is paid after the incurrence of expense. In this case, at the time
the expense is incurred as a liability, classifi ed as accrued or outstanding
liability is created. Examples of this would be outstanding salary and
taxes payable.
Characteristics of Expenses
􀀁 Expenses are incurred for the purpose of generating revenue or
benefi t.
􀀁 Benefi t is usually derived during the same accounting period.
􀀁 It is related to a particular period. However, the payment can be
made before the recognition of the expense or afterwards.
􀀁 An expense leads to decreases in the owner’s equity.
As already mentioned, expenses of an accounting period are
subtracted from the revenues of an accounting period to give income of
the accounting period. Hence,
Revenues – Expenses = Income
Before we go into the next chapter and come across more concepts,
we present below the Profi t & Loss Account of a listed company, Mro-tek
Limited (with a hope that this creates some more interest to the reader):
24 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 3.2 Profi t and Loss Account of MRO-TEK Limited for the
Year Ended March 31, 2009
31 March
2009
31 March
2008
INCOME
Domestic Sales 12,918 13,936
Exports 630 788
13,548 14,724
Less: Excise Duty 1,334 1,498
Net Sales 12,214 13,226
Other Income 736 726
TOTAL INCOME (A) 12,950 13,952
EXPENDITURE
Cost of Goods Sold 9,526 8,781
Administrative &
Selling Expenses
2,217 2,743
Financial Charges 513 18
Depreciation 260
TOTAL EXPENDITURE
(B)
12,525 1,802
PROFIT BEFORE
TAXATION (A – B)
425 2,150
Provision for Taxation 70 566
Fringe Benefi t Tax 16 19
PROFIT AFTER
TAXATION
339 1,565
APPROPRIATIONS
Dividends 222 666
Transfer to General
Reserve
40 160
Surplus carried to
Balance Sheet
739
Provides detail as to which
products or services are major
revenue items; it presents the
sales, discounts, allowances
and other related information
to arrive at the net sales.
It indicates the income earned
or gains resulting from nonoperative
transactions.
It is the cost to the company
to generate the sales shown
in Sales above.
These are the costs associated
with running the company
as opposed to the costs
of making or buying the products.
It includes items such as
salaries, rents, printing & stationery,
legal expenses, consulting,
agents commission,
advertising expenses, audit
fees, etc.
After subtracting fi nance
charges and depreciation, an
amount on which the company
expects to pay taxes.
This is the amount the
company expects to pay in
taxes for the period.
This is the profi t the company
has earned for its equity
investors (owners).
Companies periodically share their
gains with their owners (shareholders)
by paying dividends.
A n income statement is a summary of all the accounts dealing with
transactions relating to revenue and expenses.
It is an account which shows the revenue generated from sale of
goods and services and expenses incurred against such revenue, over an
accounting period. It is also referred to as a Profi t and Loss Account or
Revenue Account. A new term that we came across in this defi nition.
Account
An account is a statement, wherein information relating to an item or
a group of similar items is accumulated. Such information is accumulated
in a way that makes it very easy to display, summarize and analyze such
information. An income statement is nothing but a summarization of all
such individual accounts, relating to the elements of expense and revenue.
To reiterate, the balance sheet equation:
Owner(s) equity + Liabilities = Assets
We also observed in Box 2.1 on Page 12 that:
Owner(s) equity = Owner(s) capital + Reserves and surplus +
Retained profi ts of the company
Preparation of Income Statement
4
C H A P T E R
26 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Total dividends and drawings refer to that portion of the profi ts that
is distributed to the owners of the business. Th e profi t left is used to
conduct business by the company. Now, in the preceding mathematical
presentation, the retained profi t of the company is nothing but the profi t
earned by the company less total dividends and drawings. Hence, it is
also known as profi t reinvested or profi t ploughed back in the business. So,
the retained profi ts can be written as:
Retained Profi ts = Profi ts – Total dividends and drawings
Now, since profi ts are nothing but revenue less expenses, the formula
for retained earnings may also be expressed as:
RE = R – E – D
where,
RE = Retained earnings
R = Revenue (or sales)
E = Expenses
D = Dividends and drawings
Readers, to do well, go through the above discussion once again.
Let us now understand the discussed concepts with the help of an example.
Example 4: Ramsons
During an accounting period, Ramsons buys 12 units of inventory for
Rs. 1,200. Another 10 units are purchased on credit, for Rs. 1,000. As many
as 15 units of inventory were sold during the period, on credit, for Rs. 2,250.
Five units of inventory were sold for cash, for Rs. 750, during the same period.
We are required to prepare the profi t and loss account of Ramsons for the given
period.
Preparation of Income Statement 27
To prepare the profi t and loss account for the period, we would have
to identify the realized revenues for the period and the corresponding
expired costs or expenses (Table 4.1) to be matched against such revenue.
Table 4.1 Realized Revenue
Revenue of the period Amount (Rs.)
15 units sold on credit 2,250
5 units sold for cash 750
Total 3,000
We have recognized Rs. 3,000 as realized revenue, irrespective of
whether cash is collected or not. In other words, for the purposes of
revenue recognition, both credit and cash sales are recognized as realized
revenue. Now, the expenses of the period or expired costs will have to be
reckoned with in relation to the realized revenues.
Th e total cost incurred during the period is Rs. 2,200, for 22 units of
inventory. Th e costs incurred during the period are also reckoned without
having reference to whether the costs are actually paid for in cash or not.
Th e costs being incurred resulted in the acquisition of an asset, namely,
inventory.
In order to determine the expense of the period, we have to take
recourse to the realization of the revenue. What portion of the unexpired
cost expires in the process of earning the revenue? Th at expired portion of
the asset is the expense of the period.
In our example, 20 units of inventory were parted with for earning the
revenue. Th us, Rs. 2,000, the cost of 20 units of inventory, is the expired
cost or expense for the period. Remember, that part of this inventory was
purchased on credit. Th erefore, it follows that the expense in accounting
need not imply a decrease in cash, just as revenue need not imply an
increase in it.
The two units of inventory, costing Rs. 200, remaining unsold
are assets or the unexpired cost and have no relevance to the idea of
measurement of profi t. Now to summarize, see Table 4.2.
28 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 4.2 Summary
Revenue of the period Amount (Rs.)
15 units sold on credit 2,250
5 units sold for cash 750
Total revenue of the period 3,000
Less: Cost of goods sold or expired cost of inventory 2,000
Profi t of the period 1,000
Revenue minus expense or profi t of the period is Rs. 1,000. We can
present the same formally in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Ramsons Profi t and Loss Account
(For the accounting period)
Expenses Amount (Rs.) Revenues Amount (Rs.)
Cost of goods sold 2,000 Sales 3,000
Profi t for the period 1,000
Total 3,000 Total 3,000
Table 4.4 Ramsons Balance Sheet at the End of First Period
Assets Amount (Rs.) Liabilities Amount (Rs.)
Current assets Owner(s) equity
Cash 750 Contributed capital 3,000
Receivables 2,250 Profi t 700
Inventory 700
Total 3,700 Total 3,700
In the case of Ramsons, we dealt with only direct revenue and direct
expense. Revenue arose from two sale transactions––one on credit and the
other on cash. Th e expense was one simple direct item of expense––the
cost of sale or the recognition of expiration of inventory cost. Before we
Preparation of Income Statement 29
proceed to study a more complex example and a detailed profi t and loss
account we must discuss some of the expenses or cost expirations, which
cannot be traced so directly as in the case of cost of goods sold and are
mostly of the nature of indirect expenses.
Th ere are expenses that are to be incurred by a business, such as
rent, interest, and advertising, which are fairly diffi cult to be traced to
particular units of revenue for the purpose of matching. At the same
time, it is obvious that the cost incurred on these items does not create
any discernible benefi ts in a future period or create a value that can be
exchanged. Th ese costs are generally attributable to the revenue earning
power of an accounting period and can be safely considered as expired costs
in relation to the realized revenues of a period. Th ese costs are sometimes
referred to as period costs and matched against the revenue of the period
without tracing a direct relation to the revenues. Based on this discussion,
we present two important equations (see Box 4.1).
Box 4.1 Income Statement and Balance Sheet Equations
Income statement equation
Retained earnings during a period = Revenue – (Expenses
+ Dividends)
Balance sheet equation
Assets = Liabilities + (Contributed capital + Accumulated
retained earnings)
Readers can try to look at example 4 on page 26–28 using the two
equations, to see if the balance sheet and income summary created go
with each other. Before we get into a real life income statement we will
spend a little more time on understanding the various types of profi ts that
we come across in the corporate language.
30 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Various Types of Profit
Th e profi t and loss account refl ects the fi nancial health of a company.
Th ere are diff erent proportions of profi t and loss which are addressed by
separate expressions.
Gross Profit
Th e gross profi t or gross margin is obtained by subtracting the cost of
goods sold from the sales revenue. Direct costs in the production of goods
or in the delivery of services are part of the cost of goods sold. Th us, in a
manufacturing enterprise the raw materials that go into making a fi nished
product are part of cost of goods sold. A detailed discussion with respect
to the cost of goods sold will follow later in the chapter.
Operating Profit
Operating profit is the figure obtained after subtracting operating
expenses from gross profi t. Operating expenses are those expenses which
the business incurs in the normal course of operations like personnel,
depreciation and other expenses2. Operating profit is the surplus
generated by the normal operations of the company. Th e company,
irrespective of the method of fi nancing, earns this amount. Th is is a
measure of the operational effi ciency of the company3. We will discuss
operating profi t and operating expenses of a company in more detail,
later in the chapter.
2Expenses such as interest, fi nance charges/fees, expenses incurred in the process of selling of a fi xed
asset, one-time registration costs, which do not form part of the operating expenses are known as
non-operating expenses.
3Since it does not cover non-operating activities such as interest cost (of a loan) and sale/purchase
of investments, hence non-operating incomes and expenses which are related to investment or sale
of assets are excluded from this.
Preparation of Income Statement 31
Profit Before Interest & Tax (PBIT)
It is the fi nal profi t of the company before deducting any interest or
tax from it. It is a good measure of the managerial performance of the
company. It is obtained by subtracting non-operating expenses (except
interest) from operating profi t.
Profit Before Tax (PBT)
It is the fi nal profi t of the company before deducting any tax from it.
We can obtain this by simply deducting interest from PBIT. So, it clearly
Bholuram: What do you mean by the normal operations of
the company?
Finnova: Look Bholu, a business or a fi rm is set up to perform
a particular activity. It regularly performs that activity and
derives profi t by virtue of performing that activity. Such
operations and such income, derived from the main-line
of the business is known as operating income/operating
profi t. Apart from this core activity, a fi rm may also end
up deriving profi t from certain other non-core activities of
the business. These activities fall outside the purview of the
normal operations of the business and any income derived
from these are known as non-operating income. To give you
an example, a wholesale vegetable vendor may derive some
income, both from selling vegetables and from interest that
it earns as a result of providing a credit facility to one of the
customers. Here, income derived from selling of vegetables
forms the core activity of the grocery store and is classifi ed
as operating income, while interest income earned is derived
from an activity that does not form part of the core activity
of the business and is incidental to it. Such income is
hence, classifi ed as non-operaing income. We will list more
examples of non-operating income, later in the chapter.
Bholuram: That reminds me that I have to purchase
some vegetables for home. Otherwise, I will get a good
thrashing!!
32 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
gives a fair view of activities and profi t of the company without the burden
of taxation.
Profit After Tax (PAT) or Net Profit
As the name indicates, it is obtained by deducting tax from PBT. It is
the net income earned by a company after providing for tax and hence
measures the net earnings to the owners of the company, that is, its
shareholders.
Profit Available for Distribution
Th is is obtained by summing up PAT and the retained earnings from
previous years, that is, the surplus balance of Profit or Loss Account
raking from previous years. Th is is named so, as this fi gure gives us the
total amount that the company can distribute to the shareholders of the
company as dividends or withdrawals. Th is quite obviously includes the
current year and the past year surpluses/profi ts (to the extent that have
not been already distributed).
Appropriations
Th is is the last disclosure in the income statement and is fi gured out at
its very bottom. It gives us the way in which the fi nal profi t available
for distribution is actually disposed off by the company. Appropriation
includes items such as:
(i) Transfer to reserves: Th e part of the profi ts that the company retains
in the business.
(ii) Dividend to be paid to the shareholders: Th e part of the profi ts that
are distributed to the share holders as dividends.
Preparation of Income Statement 33
Retained Earnings
It is normally derived by deducting the dividend to be paid to shareholders
from the profi t available for distribution. Th e discussed profi t types may be
easily represented in fl ow chart 4.1.
Flow Chart 4.1 Contents of Profi t and Loss Account
Sales (or revenues)
Less: Cost of goods sold
↓
Gross profi t
Less: Operating expenses
↓
Operating profi t
Less: Non-operating expenses
↓
Profi t before interest and tax (PBIT):
Less: Interest
↓
Profi t before tax (PBT):
Less: Tax
↓
Profi t after tax (PAT):
Add: Previous year’s balance of P&L A/C
↓
Profi t available for distribution:
Less: Appropriations
↓
Retained earnings
34 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Form and Contents of Profit and Loss Account
So far, we have discussed the profi t and loss account in the accounts
format, i.e., listing all the revenues earned on the right hand side and all
the expenses incurred on the left hand side4. It is also a common practice
to present the revenue and expense information in a summarized statement
form and to provide the details in attached schedules. Th e method of
presentation does not alter the results in any case, since the relationship
is always:
Revenue – Expense = Profi t (or Loss)
We give below, a summarized income statement of one imaginary
company, Arati Tools India Limited in both the formats. We shall discuss
the items presented subsequently. Most of the subsequent discussions
would be based on this company’s income statement.
Table 4.5 Accounts Format
Profi t and Loss Account of Arati Tools India Ltd. for the Year
Ended December 31, 2009
(All fi gures in Rs. millions)
Debit Credit
Schedule Amount Schedule Amount
Cost of goods
sold
3 130 Sales net 1 255
Gross profi t 130 Other income 2 5
260 260
Personnel
expenses
4 49 Gross profi t 130
Depreciation 5 11
Other
expenses
6 28
4In accounting, the left hand side of an account format in the T-form is referred to as the debit
(Dr.) side and amounts recorded on the left side of an account are referred to as debit amounts.
Th e right hand side of a T-account format is referred to as the credit (Cr.) side and amounts recorded
on this side are referred to as credit amounts. To avoid confusion in understanding, please
do not attach any further meaning to debit and credit than that they are on left and right side of
the account respectively.
Preparation of Income Statement 35
Operating
profi t
42
130 130
Interest 7 12 Operating
income
42
Profi t before
taxes
30
42 42
Income tax
provision
12 Profi t before
taxes
30
Net profi t after
tax
18
30 30
Alternately, the same profi t and loss account can be presented as
follows:
Table 4.6 Statement Format
Profi t and Loss Account of Arati Tools India Ltd. for the Year
Ended December 31, 2009
(All fi gures in Rs. millions)
Schedule Amount
Sales net 1 255
Other income 2 5
Total revenue 260
Cost of goods sold 3 130
Gross profi t 130
Operating expenses
Personnel 4 49
Depreciation 5 11
Other expenses 6 28
Operating profi t 42
Interest 7 12
Profi t before taxes 30
Income tax provision 12
Net profi t after tax 18
Th e summarized profi t and loss account will be accompanied by
schedules, providing details for various items forming the total. For
example, Schedule 7, which corresponds to interest, will contain details
36 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
with respect to the diff erent loans against which the interest is paid, the
rate of interest applicable, the bank to which the interest is paid, etc.
Sales
Th e net sales amount shown in the profi t and loss account is after
deductions (worth Rs. 5 million) from gross sales. Schedule 1 provides
the detailed break-up of the sales, by diff erent divisions of the company,
as also by domestic market and export sales. We observe that Arati
Tools earns its maximum revenue from its machine tools and watch
divisions.
Table 4.7 Break-up of Sales
Schedule 1: Sales Rs. (millions)
Gross sales 260.00
Less: Sales returns and allowances 1.75
Sales discount 3.25 5.00
Net sales 255.00
Domestic:
Machine Tools group 83
Watch group 87
Tractor group 60
Lamp group 13
Dairy Machinery group 2
Total domestic sales 245.00
Export:
Machine Tools Group 6
Watch Group 2
Others 2
Total export sales 10.00
Preparation of Income Statement 37
Sales Returns and Allowance
Sales records are prepared as and when goods are shipped to customers.
Th e customers may return goods that are not according to specifi cations,
are damaged or defective and in such cases, a refund of the sale is made.
If the transaction was a credit sale, the account receivable in question
will be cancelled. It is also a usual practice for the customer to retain the
goods and an allowance may be made to compensate the customer for the
damage, change in specifi cation, or any other deviation from the order.
Such refunds or allowances are separately accumulated and accounted
for, for the purpose of monitoring and control by the management. As
shown in Schedule 1 of Arati Tools, at the time of preparation of the profi t
and loss account, such allowances are set off against the gross sales and
the net sales are taken as the operating revenue earned. Many companies
may not disclose this information in published accounts as competitors
may use it to their advantage.
Sales or Cash Discount
Sales discounts are reductions from the invoice price (gross sales price
without accommodating cash discounts), granted for prompt payment of
the invoice, within a specifi ed time limit. Th ese reductions are sometimes
called cash discounts. In our illustration, Arati Tools allowed Rs. 3.25
million as discounts to customers.
It is a usual practice to state the discount off ered to a customer on the
invoice. Th e terms of payment with regards to the amount of discount,
conditions for discount, etc., are usually presented in short forms or
symbols.
Examples of such short forms are:
􀀁 ‘Net amount’ or ‘No cash discount’ – (N);
􀀁 ‘Net Amount due at end of the Month’ – (N/EOM);
􀀁 Net amount due in 30 days of invoice, no cash discounts –
(N/30);
􀀁 A 3 percent discount if payment is made in 10 days, otherwise net
amount to be paid in 30 days – (3/10, n/30).
38 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
We will just explain the last item – 3/10, n/30; in some greater detail.
An invoice of 3/10, n/30 states that a three percent discount is off ered
if payment is made within 10 days. It also implies that if payment is
not made within 10 days, the normal credit of 30 days can be availed.
Suppose you have an invoice of Rs. 1,000 with ‘3/10, n/30’, you are
losing three percent for 20 days’ credit. Converting this 3 percent for 20
days interest to annual terms, would cost you 360/20 x 3% = 60% per
annum in equivalent interest! Th is knowledge will defi nitely help you in
planning your short-term fi nances more eff ectively.
A company can have diff erent terms of payment for diff erent type
of customers. Usually, terms of payment depend on factors such as past
track record and credit reputation of the customer. A big customer with a
good track record will obviously be given better credit terms than a small
one with an uncertain track record.
Trade Discount
You will not fi nd a mention of trade discount in the profi t and loss
accounts. It is a usual practice to make the adjustment for trade discount
while calculating the invoice price itself. So, if sales price is Rs. 100 and
a trade discount of 10 percent is allowed, the invoice price mentioned
would be for Rs. 90 (being equal to Rs. 100 minus Rs. 10 by way of trade
discount). Trade discounts are in general used when a manufacturer makes
bulk sales to a wholesaler, or a wholesaler makes large sales to a retailer.
Box 4.2 Cash and Trade Discount
Bholuram: Hey Finnova! Will a company offer both Cash
Discount and Trade Discount?
Finnova: Bholu, now I can see a glimpse of brain in you.
Yes, companies can and do offer both cash discounts and
sales discounts simultaneously. Larger a company is and
larger is the size of the order - the more attractive (large)
will be the cash discount and trade discount. While cash
discount offered will be visible in the invoice but the trade
discount offered will not be visible in the invoice note.
Preparation of Income Statement 39
Non-operating Income/Other Income
Th e revenue earned by an enterprise is usually bifurcated into two parts,
operating income and non-operating income. As mentioned earlier
(in Box 4.2), operating income usually refers to the income derived from
the main-line operations of the business. Other income usually arises
from activities incidental to the business. Schedule 2 (Table 4.7) lists the
details of income from non-operating receipts by Arati Tools India Ltd.
Table 4.8 Income from Non-operating Receipts
Schedule 2: Other income Rs. (millions)
Interest – banks 0.50
Interest – staff and offi ces 1.20
Export incentives 1.80
Sales agency commission 0.50
Profi t on sales of assets 0.30
Dividend on trade investments 0.20
Other miscellaneous income 0.50
Total 5.00
Cost of Goods Sold
Th e computation of the cost of goods sold is very complex in the case of a
multi-product, multi-division company, where you have large quantities
of semi-fi nished goods. In fact, the whole discipline of costing is primarily
concerned with calculating the cost of goods sold. However, in simple
cases where a trader deals in commodities and where each unit bought
Bholuram: Got it! In such a case, the next time we do
business with each other, I would prefer a trade discount
from you and hefty one there. I would also eagerly look
forward to some sales allowances from you.
40 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
can be identifi ed, costing becomes much easier aff air. In order to calculate
the cost of goods sold, we start the computation with the inventory that
we have carried forward from the previous period and add all the expenses
pertaining to the manufacturing part of the specifi ed good. For example,
in Table 4.5, we start with the inventory as on January 1, 2009. Further,
we add all the costs associated with the manufacturing of the goods in
the year, i.e., purchase of material (purchase, other direct material costs),
costs of material transportation (freight inwards) and cost of manufacturing
(power, fuel). Th is provides us with the total goods that we have at our
disposal for potential sale. Th en we subtract the raw material and work in
progress inventory at the end of the accounting period. Th is provides us
with the total fi nished goods that we have at our disposal for potential sale.
From this fi gure, we fi nally deduct the fi nished goods that is not sold during
the period (i.e., retained and is classifi ed as fi nished goods inventory) to get
the cost of goods sold in this fi nancial year. Th e cost of the goods sold in
summary, presented in our illustration of Arati Tools India Limited, can be
understood more clearly from Schedule 3.
Table 4.9 Cost of Goods Sold
Schedule 3: Cost of goods sold Rs. (millions)
Inventory on January 1, 2009 81.00
Add: Purchase 110.00
Freight-in 10.00
Other direct material costs 10.00
Fuel 3.00
Power 2.00
Total goods available 216.00
Less: Raw material and semi fi nished inventory on December 31,
2009
71.00
Goods available for sale 145.00
Less: Finished goods inventory on December 31, 2009 15.00
Cost of goods sold 130.00
Preparation of Income Statement 41
Gross Profit
Gross profi t or gross margin obtained by subtracting the cost of goods
sold from the sales revenue, has great signifi cance for a company. Th e
cost of goods sold usually refl ects the direct input costs and to a great
extent, is variable with the volume of operations. In other words, cost
of goods sold per unit of sales, is a fi xed ratio. Th e gross profi t, which is
left after deduction of cost of goods sold, should be suffi cient to cover all
other operating expenses of the business. Only then will the business be
viable and expected to turn a profi t. Certainly, companies by and large
try to maximize their gross profi ts by maximizing their total sales using
the best combination of sales price and volume of business. Given a fi xed
sales price, management and control of the gross margin will depend on
improving the cost effi ciency of operations and procurement.
Operating Expenses
Th e cost of goods sold normally includes all costs of making the inventory
available for sale, and are directly or indirectly traceable to the inventory to
be sold. Examples of such costs would be cost of raw materials and cost of
labour that went into making the goods. Apart from such costs, a fi rm also
incurs some expenses towards running of its day to day aff airs and managing
the enterprise as a whole, like salary paid to the offi ce staff , cost of stationery
and rent paid for offi ce. All those expenses, which are necessary to run the
business enterprise or the organization, which are not directly associated
with the company’s output on a cause and eff ect relationship, are usually
termed as operating expenses. It is possible to accumulate these expenses on
the basis of material, personnel and other expenses, as in the case of the
profi t and loss account of Arati Tools India Limited.
Personnel Expenses
Personnel expenses include remuneration and other benefi ts to the staff
and workmen. Schedule 4 details the expenses on account of personnel
for Arati Tools.
42 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 4.10 Personnel Expenses
Schedule 4: Personnel expenses Rs. (millions)
Salaries, wages and bonus 37.81
House rent allowance 2.19
Gratuity 0.75
Contribution to provident fund 2.75
Contribution to employees state insurance (ESI) 0.50
Workmen and staff welfare expense 5.00
Total 49.00
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation is the expiration of costs of fi xed assets. It is a usual practice
to classify the depreciation expense according to the diff erent groups of
assets. In case of Arati Tools, Schedule 5 gives the break-up of depreciation
for the diff erent groups of assets. We will discuss depreciation in more
detail in a separate chapter.
Table 4.11 Depreciation
Schedule 5: Depreciation Rs. (millions)
Fixed assets 9.84
Tools and Instruments 0.02
Patterns, jigs and fi xtures 1.14
Total 11.00
Other Expenses
All the expenses other than those disclosed separately, are usually grouped
together as other expenses. Th ese expenses are relatively very small when
considered as individual items. It is still customary to give, a detailed
break-up of the major items of operating expenses other than personnel,
depreciation and fi nancing costs. In case of Arati Tools, the details are
provided in Schedule 6.
Preparation of Income Statement 43
Table 4.12 Other Expenses
Schedule 6: Other Expenses Rs. (millions)
Power and fuel 3.10
Rent 0.50
Rates and taxes 0.40
Insurance 0.50
Water and electricity 0.60
Repairs to buildings 0.20
Repairs to machinery 0.80
Printing and stationery 0.90
Advertisement and publicity 2.40
Training 0.10
Audit fees 0.05
Royalties 0.85
Sole selling and other agents commission 4.70
Director(s)’ fees 2.00
Provision for bad debts and advances 0.20
Loss on assets sold or discarded 1.30
Provision for warranty repairs 1.00
Miscellaneous expenses 8.40
Total 28.00
Operating Profit
Operating profit is the figure obtained after subtracting personnel,
depreciation and other expenses, from the gross profi t. Th e only other
major expense to be met at this stage is the interest expense. Th us,
operating profi t is the surplus generated by the operations of the company.
Th e company, irrespective of the method of fi nancing (as interest is not
accounted for), earns this amount. Th is is a measure of the operational
efficiency of the company. This is also referred as Operating Profit
before Interest and Taxes (OPBIT) or Earnings before Interest and Taxes
(EBIT).
44 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Interest Expense
Th e management has the option to fi nance the assets from exclusively
owner(s)’ equity or with a combination of owner(s)’ equity and borrowed
funds (usually, through long-term liabilities). Th e interest part comes in
if the management decides to use borrowed funds to fi nance either part
or whole of the entity’s assets from borrowed funds. In that case, interest
is the compensation paid by the company to the lenders for parting
with their money for a specifi ed time. In the corporate world, most of
the business entities use some amount of borrowed funds to fi nance
themselves. Schedule 7 (Table 4.12) shows the diff erent items of interest
commitments of Arati Tools.
Table 4.13 Items of Interest
Schedule 7: Interest Rs. (millions)
Debentures 0.58
Fixed deposits 1.50
Loans from Government 5.00
Term loans from banks/fi nancial institutions 0.42
Cash (packaging) credit from banks 3.50
Others 1.00
Total 12.00
Net Profit before Tax
Net profi t before tax is the surplus after meeting all expenses, including
interest. Th is is the profi t available to the company as a result of both its
operating as well as fi nancing performance.
Income Tax
Th e profi t before tax determines the level of taxation. As per tax laws, the
amount of tax payable is not determined on the basis of the reported net
Preparation of Income Statement 45
profi t. In most cases, some reclassifi cation and adjustments have to be
made to the profi ts arrived at by the fi rm to compute the taxable profi t.
Th ese adjustments have to be made to accommodate the various income
tax laws, provisions of which usually diff er from the general accounting
practices followed by the fi rm.
To give you an example, tax laws in most countries, provide for tax
concessions for investment in fi xed assets, research and development,
and so on. Th ese allowances reduce the amount of tax payable by the
company during the year in which such benefi t is availed. Again, in most
countries, tax concessions are also applicable to companies which earn
income by way of exports in select sectors and for setting up investments/
infrastructure in backward and underdeveloped regions.
Net Profit or Profit after Tax
Profi t after tax is the net amount of surplus earned by the company
during the accounting period. Th is is the amount ultimately available
to the company for appropriation, i.e., this amount can be either
distributed as dividends to shareholders (owners) or retained in the
business as retained earnings. Not distributing the profi t among the
owners increases the owner(s) investment, that is, owner(s) equity in the
business. From the shareholders perspective, the profi t after tax (PAT) or
earnings after tax (EAT) is the most important performance indicator of
the company.
From the Corporate World
ACC Limited (formerly, the Associated Cement Companies Limited)
is India’s oldest and largest cement manufacturer. To give the readers a
peek into the real world, we present the company’s consecutive income
statements.
46 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 4.14 Income Statement—ACC Limited
Profi t and Loss Account for the Financial Years 2006 to 2008
Ended December 31
(All fi gures in Rs. crore)
Income FY 2008 FY 2007 FY 2006
1. Sale of products and services
(gross sales/turnover)
8,259.77 7,848.32 6,504.46
Less: excise duty recovered 951.15 857.64 653.22
Less: sales discounts, sales returns,
etc.
130.95 114.08 120.41
Sale of products and services (net
sales/turnover)
7,177.67 6,876.60 5,730.83
2. Other Income (non-operating
income)
288.71 177.49 123.10
Gross revenue 7,466.38 7,054.09 5,853.93
Expenditure
3. Manufacturing expenses 3,347.04 2,899.84 2,642.84
Gross profi t 4,119.34 4,154.25 3,211.09
4. Personnel expenses 413.04 353.27 322.54
5. Depreciation 294.18 305.07 260.95
6. Other expenses 1,637.56 1,491.75 939.77
Operating income (or operating profi t) 1,774.56 2,004.16 1,687.83
7. Interest 39.96 73.87 54.37
Profi t before tax 1,734.60 1,930.29 1,633.46
8. Corporate tax 521.81 491.70 393.86
Profi t after tax (or net income) 1,212.79 1,438.59 1,239.60
The importance of profi t and its measurement in accounting accords an
important position to the income statement. However, it will be interesting
to see how this fi nancial statement is related to the balance sheet. Figure 5.1
captures the same.
Table 5.1 Relation of Financial Statement with Balance Sheet
t
0 Accounting period - 1 t
1 Accounting period - 2 t
2
Balance
Sheet
(t
0)
Profi t & Loss Account
for the fi rst
accounting period
Balance
Sheet
(t
1)
Profi t & Loss Account
for the second
accounting period
Balance
Sheet
(t
2)
In other words, both of them are links in the information chain which
make up the life of the enterprise.
While, balance sheet is a position statement at a point in time, income
statement on the other hand summarizes an enterprise’s performance over
a period of time.
The ensuing discussion links both the financial statements of a
business entity.
Please recall the basic balance sheet equation we have learnt in the
previous lesson. We will repeat it for your convenience.
Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ Equity........ (1)
Income Statement and
Balance Sheet
5
C H A P T E R
48 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Here we need to keep in mind, that the owner(s)’ capital need
not be equal to the contributed capital, that is, the amount of capital
contributed to the capital by the owners; and is normally not the case.
In fact, the owner(s)’ equity changes with every sales transaction. How
does this happen? Th e following two changes take part with every sales
transaction:
􀀁 Th e amount of sales revenue realized increases owner(s) equity.
􀀁 Th e cost of goods parted with decreases owner(s) equity.
Th erefore, the resultant increase in the owner(s) equity was equal
to the net increase in the assets (sales revenue – cost of goods). Th at is,
equal to the profi t. We explained an alternative representation of owner(s)
equity in the previous lesson as being equivalent to:
Owners’ Equity = Contributed Capital + Retained Earnings.... (2)
Combining equations (1) and (2) results in the expanded balance
sheet equation as shown below:
Assets = Liabilities + Contributed Capital + Retained Earnings ... (3)
Based on the discussion in the previous chapters, we could write the
income statement relationship as follows:
Retained earnings = Revenue – Expenses – Dividends.... (4)
Now, by just putting this representation of retained earnings in
equation (4) in the balance sheet equation (3), we will get the following
equation for assets:
Assets = Liabilities + Contributed Capital + Past Retained
Earnings + Revenue – Expenses – Dividends.... (5)
Th e last three terms in equation (5) are referred to as the profi t and loss
account or income summary. Th us, we fi nd that the profi t and loss account
is an integral part of any balance sheet, in that it is an expansion of one
of the terms of the balance sheet. We reiterate our point with the help of
Figure 5.1.
Income Statement and Balance Sheet 49
Figure 5.1 Balance Sheet and Profi t and Loss Account Relation
In other words, equation (5) can be restated as follows:
Assets = Liabilities + Contributed Capital + Beginning Retained
Earnings Balance + Revenue – Expenses – Dividends ... (6)
Th e resulting new balance sheet of the enterprise can also be presented
as follows:
Assets = Liabilities + Contributed Capital + Ending
Balance Retained Earnings... (7)
One can clearly make out that equations (5), (6) and (7) convey the
same information in diff erent ways. Let us now discuss the role of balance
sheet items in generating the income statement.
Th e profi t and loss account measures the income generated by the
entity. Th e income is generated from or with the use of its assets. Th us,
the profi t and loss account measures and includes the revenue and income
(which are part of the profi t and loss account) arising out of assets (which
{Revenues for
the Period
End of Period
Expenses for
the period
Beginning Balance
of Retained
Earnings
Net Income
(Loss) for the
Period
Dividends for
the Period
Ending Balance
of Retained
Earnings
Start of
the
Period
+–
–
–
=
=
¬ Profit and Loss A/c ®
50 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
form part of the balance sheet). In Box 5.1, we uncover the essence of the
requirement of the income statement again.
Box 5.1 Need for An Income Statement
Normally, most of the events and transactions aff ect the assets
and/or liabilities and hence aff ect the balance sheet. A change
in the owner(s)’ equity can either be brought about by a change
in the owners’ contribution or by sale transactions. Usually, the
transaction of sale of goods and services has a two-way impact on
the position of the entity.
􀀁 First, an asset increases, leading to an increase in owners’ equity.
􀀁 Second, an asset decreases, leading to a decrease in owners’ equity.
Therefore, subject to changes in the owners’ contribution, the
comparison of the owner(s)’ equity between two periods will show
the change in the owner(s)’ equity aff ected by retained earnings.
This does not provide much knowledge about the operations
of the business (say, in terms of size, profi tability of the business,
etc.). Hence, in order to meet the information requirement, we
summarized these transactions relating to revenue and expenses
separately as income statement.
We should also note that revenue and expenses relate to a period
(an accounting period), and not to a point in time, like assets
and liabilities. Recognition and measurement of the revenue and
expense are based on the ideas of realization, accrual and matching.
Th erefore, the income across an accounting period may be compared
with the help of the data obtained from the profi t and loss account.
Figure 5.2 gives us a peek into the corporate world. It links the income
statement of Infosys Technologies Limited for the accounting period
starting from April 1, 2008 to March 31, 2009, with the balance sheets
of March 31, 2008 and March 31, 2009. At the start of the fi nancial year
(FY) of 2009 Infosys had reserves and surplus balance at Rs 13,204 crore.
Th e performance of Infosys Technologies in FY2009 added Rs 4,319
crore to its reserve and surplus increasing it to Rs 17,523 crore as on
March 31, 2009.
Income Statement and Balance Sheet 51
Figure 5.2 Infosys Technologies’ Limited Income Statement
FY2009 and its Relation with Balance Sheets FY2008 and
FY2009
Now that we are pretty clear about the profi t and loss statement and
its importance with regards to the balance sheet, let us look at some of the
more relevant items of the balance sheet and their treatment.
{Revenues for
FY 2009 =
Rs 20,264 Crores
End of Period, i.e.,
31st March 2009
Starting Balance
Reserve & Surplus
Rs 13,204 Crores
Net Income
for FY 2009 =
Rs.5,819 Crores
Ending Balance
Reserve & Surplus
Rs. 17,523 Crores
Start of the
Period, i.e.,
+–
–
–
=
=
¨ Profit and Loss A/c Æ
Expenses for
FY 2009 =
Rs 20,264 Crores
Dividends for
FY 2009
(including taxes)
= Rs. 1,500 Crores
The only thing certain with respect to prices is that they are not certain.
Th is makes the process of recording inventory complex. Th ere may be
situations wherein the price at which we buy and record goods may not
remain the same over a period of time, resulting in complications with
respect to their carrying cost. For example, a company may buy 200 kg of
cotton at Rs. 5 per kg and hence record it at Rs. 1,000. Eventually, the price
of cotton may rise to say, Rs. 10. Now, this presents a dilemma, whether to
record it at Rs. 1,000 (Rs. 5 per kg) or Rs. 2,000 (Rs.10 per kg). Finding
the exact price at which they need to be recorded becomes a bit diffi cult.
Th ese issues make it necessary to evolve a uniform approach for charging
the cost of materials sold. Hence, the rule followed is that the inventory is
always recorded and charged to the profi t and loss account on the basis of
its historical cost, that is, the price at which it is originally purchased. While
it solves a part of the problem, still some room for confusion remains in real
life as there are situations wherein diff erent quantities of the same good are
purchased at diff erent prices at diff erent points in time. To get through this
problem, there are three inventory valuation options at our disposal.
First In First Out (FIFO)
Th is is one of the most common systems of recording inventory. It assumes
that the sales are made in the order at which they are purchased. Th e
Inventory Valuation
6
C H A P T E R
Inventory Valuation 53
practical implication of this principle is as follows. Suppose that diff erent
quantities of a good (say, a liquid commodity) are purchased at diff erent
prices––Th e fi rst 200 litres at Rs. 10 per litre; the next 500 litres at Rs
15 per litre; and the next 300 litres at Rs 20 per litre. Assume the entire
purchase was stored in one tank. We have purchased a total of 1,000 litres
of goods, each recorded at diff erent prices. Th e total amount at which the
inventory would be recorded is as follows:
(200 litres × Rs. 10 per litre) + (500 litres × Rs. 15 per litre) + (300
litres × Rs. 20 per litre) = Rs. 15,500
Suppose 400 litres of this particular good is sold during the same
accounting period. Now, this presents a problem. How do we fi nd out
as to which part of the above 1,000 litres of the good is sold? Quite
logically, since the entire inventory was kept at one place with no clear
separation, one would not be able to exactly pinpoint which portion of
the inventory is sold. Hence, this situation would demand that we make
certain assumptions. In the case of First In First Out (FIFO), we assume
that the good that is bought fi rst will be the one which will be sold fi rst.
In the above example, if we sell 400 litres of the good in question,
then we will suppose that 200 litres of good bought at Rs. 10 per litre and
200 litres of good bought at Rs. 15 per litre are the ones that have been
sold. So, the inventory left with us would be:
(300 litres × Rs. 15 per litre) + (300 litres × Rs. 20 per litre) =
Rs. 10,500
A completely opposite assumption is made in the case of Last In First
Out (LIFO).
Last In First Out (LIFO)
Th is is an alternative way of recording inventory. Companies following
this principle assume that ‘the goods which are bought last will be the one
which will be sold fi rst’. Let us straightaway move into the example being
discussed to understand this principle. Th e inventory of the business was
as follows:
54 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
(200 litres × Rs. 10 per litre) + (500 litres × Rs. 15 per litre) +
(300 litres × 20 per litre) = Rs. 15,500
A business following this principle would assume that out of the 1000
litres, the portion of goods sold would be 300 litres bought at Rs 20 per
litre and 100 litres bought at Rs. 15 per litre. So, the inventory left with
the business would be:
(200 litres × Rs. 10 per litre) + (400 litres × Rs. 15 per litre) = Rs. 8,000
In this case, we see that inventory levels have fallen down to
Rs. 8,000.
One can observe how choosing diff erent inventory valuation methods
(FIFO, LIFO, or WAC, which we will study next) changes a company’s
cost of good sold and ending inventory position.
Weighted Average Cost (WAC)
Another possibility is to recalculate the cost of materials on a weighted
average basis, after each purchase and sale. In this case, the inventory is
recorded on the ‘weighted average cost’ (WAC). Again going back to the
same example, the total purchase was:
(200 litres × Rs. 10 per litre) + (500 litres × Rs. 15 per litre) +
(300 litres × 20 per litre) = Rs. 15,500
Now, the company has a total of 1000 litres of goods costing Rs.
15,500 . Th e company will simply calculate the weighted average price
of each litre of the good and assume it to be the cost of the inventory
for future references. To illustrate, in this case, the cost of each inventory
would be:
Rs. 15,500 ÷ 1000 litres = Rs. 15.50 per litre
In our example of a sale of 400 litres, the balance inventory remaining
with this company would be valued at:
600 litres × Rs. 15.50 = Rs. 9,300
We now move on to a more comprehensive example to understand
the treatment of inventory across these three methods. We take the help of
Inventory Valuation 55
tables to illustrate how the cost of inventory changes with each purchase
and sale transaction.
Box 6.1 FIFO, LIFO and WAC
Example 5: Ismail Traders
Table 6.1 shows purchase and sale transactions of Ismail Traders, traders of a
particular commodity, during January 2009.
Table 6.1 Computation of Profi t by FIFO, LIFO and WAC Methods
Purchases
Date Particulars No. of units Price per unit Amount
1 Jan 09 Inventory 500 3 1,500
5 Jan 09 Purchase 1,000 4 4,000
10 Jan 09 Purchase 2,000 5 10,000
15 Jan 09 Purchase 1,000 6 6,000
20 Jan 09 Purchase 3,000 4 12,000
25 Jan 09 Purchase 2,000 7 14,000
Total 9,500 47,500
Finnova: Hey Bholu! I can see you feeling sleepy. So, let me
ask you a question. On 1 January, a bullion merchant started
a business with cash worth Rs 26 Lakh. On 12 January and
25 January he purchases one kilogram of Gold (each day)
for Rs 12 Lakhs and 14 Lakhs respectively. On 31 January,
he makes a sale of one kilogram of Gold for Rs 15 Lakhs.
Now compute his profi t for the period using FIFO, WAC,
and LIFO methods of inventory valuation.
Bholuram: I am fully awake. And please do not ask me
such easy questions. Sales for the period would be Rs 15
Lakhs. The cost of sales using FIFO, WAC and LIFO
methods would be on Rs 12 Lakhs, 13 Lakhs, and 14 Lakhs
respectively. So the trading income for our bullion merchant
would be Rs 3 Lakhs using FIFO method, Rs 2 Lakhs using
WAC method and Rs 1 Lakh using LIFO method.
Finnova: This is too much! You have made my day.
56 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Sales
Date Particulars No. of units Price per unit Amount
11 Jan 09 Sales 1,000
14 Jan 09 Sales 500
16 Jan 09 Sales 1,000
21 Jan 09 Sales 2,000
30 Jan 09 Sales 1,500
Total 6,000
31 Jan 09 Inventory 3,500
Recognition of the cost of goods sold and inventory valuation on the
basis of fi rst in fi rst out (FIFO) is shown in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2 Ismail Traders: Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold under FIFO
(All monetary fi gures in Rs.)
Purchases Sales Inventory
Date No. of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount No. of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount Price
per unit
No.
of
units
Price
per unit
1 Jan 09 500 3 1,500
5 Jan 09 1,000 4 4,000
10 Jan 09 2,000 5 10,000
11 Jan 09 500 3 1,500
500 4 2,000 500 4 2,000
2,000 5 10,000
14 Jan 09 500 4 2,000 2000 5 10,000
15 Jan 09 1,000 6 6,000 2000 5 10,000
1000 6 6,000
16 Jan 09 1000 5 5,000 1000 5 5,000
1000 6 6,000
20 Jan 09 3,000 4 12,000 1000 5 5,000
1000 6 6,000
3000 4 12,000
21 Jan 09 1000 5 5000
1000 6 6000 3000 4 12,000
25 Jan 09 2,000 7 14,000 3000 4 12,000
2000 7 14,000
30 Jan 09 1500 4 6,000 1500 4 6,000
2000 7 14,000
Total 9,500 47,500 6000 27,500 3500 20,000
Inventory Valuation 57
Th e recognition of cost of goods sold and inventory valuation using
the last in fi rst out (LIFO) method is shown in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3 Ismail Traders: Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold under LIFO
(All monetary fi gures in Rs.)
Purchases Sales Inventory
Date No.
of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount No.
of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount No.
of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount
1 Jan 09 500 3 1,500
5 Jan 09 1,000 4 4,000
10 Jan 09 2,000 5 10,000
11 Jan 09 1000 5 5,000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
1000 5 5,000
14 Jan 09 500 5 2,500 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
15 Jan 09 1,000 6 6,000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
1000 6 6,000
16 Jan 09 1000 6 6,000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
20 Jan 09 3,000 4 12,000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
3000 4 12,000
21 Jan 09 2000 4 8.000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
1000 4 4,000
25 Jan 09 2,000 7 14,000 500 3 1,500
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
1000 4 4,000
2,000 7 14,000
30 Jan 09 1500 7 10,500 500 3 1,500
58 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
1,000 4 4,000
500 5 2,500
1000 4 4,000
500 7 3,500
Total 9,500 47,500 6000 32,000 3500 15,500
Table 6.4 demonstrates the recognition of cost of goods sold and the
inventory valuation using the weighted average cost (WAC) method.
Table 6.4 Ismail Traders: Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold under WAC
(All monetary fi gures in Rs.)
Purchases Sales Inventory
Date No. of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount No. of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount No. of
units
Price
per
unit
Amount
1 Jan 09 500 3 1,500 500 3 1,500
5 Jan 09 1,000 4 4,000 1500 5,500
10 Jan 09 2,000 5 10,000 3500 4.429 15,500
11 Jan 09 1000 4.429 4,429 2500 4.429 11,071
14 Jan 09 500 4.429 2,215 2000 4.429 8,857
15 Jan 09 1,000 6 6,000 3000 4.952 14857
16 Jan 09 1000 4.952 4,952 2000 4.952 9,905
20 Jan 09 3,000 4 12,000 5000 4.381 21,905
21 Jan 09 2000 4.381 8,762 3000 4.381 13,143
25 Jan 09 2,000 7 14,000 5000 5.4286 27,143
30 Jan 09 1500 5.4286 8,142 3500 5.4286 19,000
Total 9,500 47,500 6000 28,500 3500 19,000
Table 6.5 shows the comparison of the results using the three diff erent
valuation methods as a basis of recognition of the cost of goods sold and
inventory.
Table 6.5 Ismail Traders: Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold
under FIFO, LIFO and WAC
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Valuation method Purchase cost Cost of goods
sold
Value of Inventory
FIFO 47,500 27,500 20,000
LIFO 47,500 32,000 15,500
WAC 47,500 28,500 19,000
Inventory Valuation 59
From the illustration, we fi nd that the purchase cost is the same
irrespective of the method of inventory valuation. However, the cost of
goods sold and the value of inventory at the end of the period are diff erent
for the three diff erent methods of inventory valuation. If we use FIFO,
the cost of goods sold, which is based on the prices of inventory procured
earliest, prior to sales, would amount to Rs 27,500. And the closing
inventory of 3,500 units will be valued at Rs 20,000, representing the
most current purchase prices. In the case of LIFO, we fi nd that the cost
of goods sold, which is based on the most recent prices of the inventory
purchased, is Rs 32,000. Th e closing inventory is valued at the prices of
the earlier purchases at Rs 19,000. In the case of WAC, we fi nd that the
cost of goods sold, which is based on the weighted average price of the
inventory purchased, is Rs 28,500. Closing inventory is also valued at the
weighted average price of Rs 19,000. In all the cases, inventory plus cost
of goods sold would amount to the same, that is, Rs 47,500, since they
are all based on the actual historical cost only.
Here again, over the entire life of the entity, there will be no
diff erence, irrespective of the method used in the valuation of the cost of
goods sold. Th ere will also be no diff erence if the entire inventory is sold.
Th e inventory valuation diff erences refl ect the eff ects of accounting periods
on income measurement. It is also easy to recognize the fact that, if the
business purchases its entire inventory at the same prices, then the choice
of inventory valuation method will have no relevance and the cost of
goods sold and inventory would be same for all the three methods.
Box 6.2 Stock Trading
Bholuram: Stop Stop Finnova !! You have really enlightened
me, but I have a question. Very often I have come across
the word “stock taking”. What does this mean?
Finnova: Excellent observation Bholu. Let me explain this
with an example.
Stock Taking is a process wherein the physical inventory is
taken of everything in the store periodically (usually, at the
end of accounting periods). The principle for the inventory
valuation is cost or market price, whichever is lower. It is
60 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
done on a periodical basis while the yearend inventory
valuation is done on the last week of the fi nancial year. If
suppose the stock taking is done on 25th March, and the
accounting year ends on 31st March, then there needs to
be adjustment of purchases and sales done between 26th
March and 31st March. The adjustments of the goods must
be on the basis of cost.
Let me explain using an example:
Stock Take date – 26th March
Year-end date – 31st March
Actual stock on 26th March- Rs 75,000
Purchases & Sales during 27-31st March
Purchases – Rs 15,000
Sales – Rs 25,000
The sales are always with a margin of 25% on cost.
The stock computation as on 31st March would be:
Stock ascertained on 26th March - Rs 75,000
Add: Purchases during 27-31st March - Rs 15,000
Rs 90,000
Less: Cost of goods sold during 27-31st March
(25000 × 100/125) Rs 20,000
Stock as on 31st March Rs 70,000
Hence, the stock taken at the end of 31st March would be
Rs. 70,000 (as shown above).
B ased on the earlier chapters, one can deduce that the profi t and loss
account incorporates all the revenue and expense transactions relating
to business operations. It has been observed that the process of business
operations is more complex in manufacturing fi rms and hence, this
demands the preparation of a slightly extended version of the profi t and
loss account. In a manufacturing concern, the profi t and loss account
can be divided into four parts, i.e., the manufacturing account, trading
account, profit and loss account and profit and loss appropriation
account. Th ese accounts can be understood as follows:
Manufacturing Account
During a given accounting period, the manufacturing account provides
us with the cost of goods manufactured by the manufacturer. Th is is
the reason why many organizations that do not perform manufacturing
operations, do not prepare this account. For example, M/s Rasiklal
Daruwala & Co. is a manufacturer of sports goods. For the year ended
March 31, 2009, the following transactions took place:
􀀁 Raw material purchased Rs. 60,000
􀀁 Productive wages Rs. 20,000
􀀁 Power and fuel consumed Rs. 10,000
􀀁 Rent of factory Rs. 5,000
Income Statement of a
Manufacturing Concern
7
C H A P T E R
62 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
It is also known that there was a stock (inventory) of work-in-progress
as on the beginning of the year, amounting to Rs. 40,000 and the closing
stock of work-in-progress is Rs. 10,000. Th e opening and closing stocks
of raw material were Rs. 5,000 and Rs. 15,000 respectively.
In the above case, the manufacturing account of M/s Rasiklal
Daruwala & Co. shall be as follows:
Table 7.1 Manufacturing Account of M/s Rasiklal Daruwala & Co.
for the Year Ended March 31, 2009
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Debit Credit
Particulars Amount Particulars Amount
Opening work-in-progress 40,000 Closing work-inprogress
10,000
Raw material consumed:
Opening stock 5,000
Add: Purchases 60,000
Less: Closing stock (15,000) 50,000
Cost of production for
the period transferred
to the trading account 115,000
Productive wages 20,000
Power and fuel 10,000
Factory rent 5,000
125,000 125,000
In the above manufacturing account, the cost of manufacturing
associated with the carried forward inventory is represented by opening
work-in-progress (WIP). Th e current year’s manufacturing cost is added
to the opening WIP, that is, raw materials consumed, productive wages,
fuel and rent costs. Finally, the manufacturing cost of closing work-inprogress
with respect to the inventory unsold and carried forward to the
next year is subtracted to give us the current year’s cost of production.
Income Statement of a Manufacturing Concern 63
Box 7.1 Current year’s cost of production
Continuing with the illustration of M/s Rasiklal Daruwala & Co., we
move to the trading account.
Bholuram: Hey Finnova, I have a confusion. Why do you
keep adding the year’s opening fi gures (example, opening
stock of raw materials) and subtracting the closing fi gures
(example, closing stock of raw materials) to get the current
year’s fi gures?
Finnova: Bhola, let me explain this concept with a simple
example. Suppose, you are in the business of selling apples.
Now on Monday you took 20 apples from your house to sell
them in your shop, but are able to sell only 15. You leave the
remaining fi ve apples in your shop. On Tuesday, you again
take 20 apples from your house to the market. At the end
of the day you make a count and fi nd that you are left with
seven apples in your shop.
Now, imagine the apples left on Monday as the Opening
stock (5), the apples taken from your house to the shop
on Tuesday (20) as the goods produced in the current year
and the apples left at the end of Tuesday (7) as the Closing
Stock. Now, if we need to calculate the cost of goods
sold in the current period, i.e. the number of apples sold on
Tuesday. To do so, you will fi rst calculate the total number
of apples that you had at your disposal for potential sales on
Tuesday. To arrive at this fi gure, you will add the apples left
at the end of Monday with the apples brought to the shop
on Tuesday, i.e., 5 + 20 = 25 apples. This gives us the maximum
number of apples that were available to us for sale, i.e.,
this gives us the ‘goods available for sale’. Now, we simply
subtract the closing stock, i.e., the number of apples left at
the end of Tuesday to give us the number of apples actually
sold on Tuesday, i.e., (25 – 7) = 18 apples. This corresponds
to the goods sold during the period.
The same concept is applied in case of accounts wherein
the previous year’s closing fi gure is added to the current
year’s production fi gure and the current year’s closing fi gure
is subtracted from the obtained total to give us the current
year’s cost fi gures.
64 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Trading Account
Th e trading account indicates the amount of gross profi t earned by the
business, by matching the cost of the sales with the revenues generated by
the business during the period. In many cases the manufacturing account
is merged with the trading account to give us a combined manufacturing
and trading account. In the case of a manufacturer who is also a trader,
the trading account discloses not only the profi t made by the business by
selling the manufactured goods, but also profi ts generated by the sale of
goods purchased directly from others. Continuing with the same example,
if we are given the following additional information:
􀀁 Opening stock (fi nished goods) Rs. 25,000
􀀁 Sale Rs. 160,000
􀀁 Closing stock (fi nished goods) Rs. 35,000
􀀁 Cartage Rs. 15,000
􀀁 Purchase (fi nished goods) Rs. 15,000
Based on the above information, the trading account of the fi rm
appears as shown in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2 Trading Account M/s Rasiklal & Co. for the Year
Ended March 31, 2009
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Debit Credit
Particulars Amount Particulars Amount
Opening fi nished
goods
25,000 Sales 160,000
Cost of production for
the period transferred
from manufacturing
account
115,000
Closing stock of fi nished
goods
35,000
Purchase of fi nished
goods
15,000
Cartage expenses 15,000
Gross profi t 25,000
Total 195,000 Total 195,000
Income Statement of a Manufacturing Concern 65
In this way, one can calculate the amount of gross profi t earned by
matching the cost of sales with the revenues generated by the business. In
Table 7.2, the cost of sales (Rs. 170,000) is subtracted from the revenues
generated (Rs. 195,000) to give us the gross profi t (Rs. 25,000) as a
balancing fi gure.
Once a manufacturing fi rm reaches this state, it goes on to compute
its net income using the profi t and loss account. Th e process of computing
the ending balance of reserves and surplus, that is, current period’s closing
retained earnings from a fi rm’s net income fi gures is part of the profi t
and loss appropriation account. One can easily conclude that these two
accounts––profi t and loss account and profi t and loss appropriation account,
are common to all types of fi rms, i.e., manufacturing or otherwise.
Possible Future Expenses
8
C H A P T E R
A other situation encountered by us, which poses some measurement
diffi culty1, is where costs are to be incurred in subsequent periods but
which are directly in relation to the revenue of a given accounting period.
Th ese expenses pose an important problem since the expense is more or
less certain, but the amount is by and large not certain. We normally
estimate the amount of expense in question, relating to an accounting
period, in order to make a reasonably accurate measurement of the profi t
or loss of the period. Examples of such expenses could be, not receiving
payments (collection losses) with respect to credit sales (say, of a telephone
operator like Bharti Airtel), which, may be known only in a future period;
warranty costs to be incurred with respect to sales of the period (say, of
a durable consumer goods player like Videocon Industries), which are to
be incurred in future; and similar other cases. An example of such a case,
that is, bad debt expense is subsequently discussed.
Bad Debt Expense
In most business situations, sale ‘on credit’ is common. We also treat such
a sale as ‘realized’ since it produces a certain asset––accounts receivable.
Th us, a credit sale is recognized at the point of sale, during the accounting
1Here, we refer to those costs that are to be incurred in subsequent periods, but are in relation to
the revenue of this year (Matching Principle).
Possible Future Expenses 67
period in which the transaction takes place. Th e uncollected balance at
the close of the accounting period is refl ected as an asset on the balance
sheet, commonly mentioned as sundry debtors or accounts receivable or
trade debtors.
Now, if the customer is not able to make the payment, both these
accounting records, that is, record as revenue of the period and record
as asset at the close of the period will amount to an overstatement in
the fi gures of sales and accounts receivable respectively. Th us, in an ideal
scenario, accountants would deduct the total amount of bad debt (due to
bad credit sales) from these two fi gures. However, accountants have no
error-free basis of estimating the exact amount of such collection losses at
the time of sale. You will concur that the existence and the exact amount
of bad debts will be known only in a subsequent accounting period. Th is
is the reason why accountants make an estimate of the default in this
accounting period. Let us learn this through Example 6.
Example 6: Roshini Traders
A business is started in the name and style of ‘Roshini Traders’ with owner(s)
equity of Rs. 2,500. Th e business makes four credit sales of Rs. 250 each,
during an accounting period. Th e cost of sales for the same is known to be
Rs. 125 each. Th e profi t and loss account is shown in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1 Profi t and Loss Account of Roshini Traders
(For the accounting period)
Expenses Rs. Revenues Rs.
Cost of goods sold 500 Sales 1,000
Profi t for the period 500
Total 1,000 Total 1,000
Th e balance sheet records arising from this is shown in Table 8.2.
68 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 8.2 Balance Sheet of Roshini Traders
(As at the close of the accounting period)
Assets Rs. Liabilities Rs.
Accounts receivable 1,000 Retained earnings 500
Other assets 2,000 Owner(s)’ contributed
equity
2,500
Total 3,000 Total 3,000
The word ‘bad’ implies that an account receivable is no more
recoverable. Th us, an amount that was supposed to be received in the
future, but is not received and there is no chance of its recovery in its
future is known as ‘bad’. Th ere could be varied reasons for the occurrence
of bad debts, for example, closure of the buying party or a court order on
the buyer, etc.
Now, assuming that in the above example, one of the accounts goes
bad, then the collection loss will amount to Rs. 250. Now if we do not take
the fact of one credit sale worth Rs. 250 going bad then we would have
overstated the receivables (asset in the balance sheet), sales (revenue in the
profi t and loss account) and profi ts (retained earnings in the balance sheet).
While it is not possible to arrive at a certain bad debt fi gure before hand, it
is possible for us to make a rough estimation of the losses on account of bad
debts, and reduce the revenues and thereby, profi ts to that extent.
Th is is achieved by recognizing this amount of Rs. 250 as an increase
in the expense––bad debts expense––thereby, reducing profi t. Th us, we
will have a profi t and loss account and a balance sheet as shown in Table
8.3 and Table 8.4.
Table 8.3 Profi t and Loss Account of Roshini Traders
(For the accounting period)
Expenses Rs. Revenues Rs.
Cost of goods sold 500 Sales 1,000
Bad debt expense 250
Profi t for the period 250
Total 1,000 Total 1,000
Possible Future Expenses 69
Table 8.4 Balance Sheet of Roshini Traders
(As at the close of the accounting period)
Assets Rs. Revenues Rs.
Accounts receivable 1,000 Retained earnings 250
Less: Estimated collection loss (250) 750
Other assets 2,000 Other equities 2,500
Total 2,750 Total 2,750
Note that in the example, Roshini Traders has estimated its bad debts
to be Rs. 250. However, it may or may not turn out to be the case in
the next accounting period. Generally, the probable collection losses are
estimated and provided for by charging them as an expense of the period.
Such an estimated expense is reduced from the value of the asset; accounts
receivable, to show the realizable value of the asset.
Depreciation, Amortization
and Depletion
9
C H A P T E R
E very asset used in the business has a limited useful life. Th e useful life
is the period of time for which an asset can be economically used. Th is
implies that the benefi ts from the particular asset will be enjoyed by the
organization only during its useful life, after which the asset would become
incapable to be put to any profi table use. In the next two paragraphs, we
provide two diff erent explanations for adjusting this.
In our discussion earlier, we have seen that fi xed assets are long lived
and provide benefi ts beyond one operating cycle. While discussing the
idea of expense, we saw that expenses are expired costs. All costs incurred
on any asset with a limited life, thus, expire during its lifetime. Using
this understanding, it is not diffi cult to perceive what depreciation is.
Depreciation expense is the expired cost of an asset during an accounting
period. Th us, depreciation is that part of the fi xed asset which in a sense
has been used up by the company to generate the current year’s revenue.
For a fi rm, the value of the asset does not remain the same throughout
the life of the asset. It is reduced throughout the life of an asset as a result
of the wear and tear that it undergoes, as a result of constant use. Quite
obviously, no one would put the same value to a brand new car and a
car which, let us say, is 10 years old. So, in order to represent a true and
accurate value of the asset, the amount at which the asset is recorded in
the balance sheet is reduced in proportion to the life of the asset. Th e
older the asset, the more is the reduction in value. Such reduction in value
is referred to as depreciation.
Th us, depreciation may also be defi ned as the reduction in value of an
asset as a result of the wear and tear due to use or with passing of time.
Let us illustrate this idea with Example 7.
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 71
Example 7: Manoj Joshi
Manoj Joshi purchased a sewing machine having a fi ve-year life and no
salvage value for Rs. 5,000 for his tailoring business. During the life of the
asset, it will be able to earn revenue of Rs. 10,000.
Assuming no other expenses, it is simple arithmetic to fi gure out that
by using the machine, we make a profi t of Rs. 5,000 over its lifetime––
Rs. 10,000 revenues less Rs. 5,000 for cost of the machine. Th e problem
of depreciation arises when we have to measure the profi ts annually. What
should be the amount of profi t to be recognized each year?
We can approach this problem by using Table 9.1. Assume that the
following scale shows the amount of revenue earned. We take it that the revenue
is earned in equal amounts during the fi ve years of the life of the asset.
Table 9.1 Manoj Joshi, Revenue Over the Period of Use of the Assets
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Total revenue = Rs. 10,000
Period → 1 2 3 4 5
Amount 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 = Rs.10,000
Assuming no other costs, we can say that the only cost is the cost
of the sewing machine, which becomes an expense over the fi ve-year
period, since there is no salvage value. Now, the question is, how should
we apportion this cost over the fi ve-year life of the asset? If we make the
simple assumption that the cost expires in an equal proportion, we have
this simplest solution as shown in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2 Manoj Joshi, Cost Expiration Over the Period of Use
of the Assets
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Total machine
cost
= Rs. 5,000
Period → 1 2 3 4 5
Amount 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 = Rs. 5,000
Unexpired at the
end of the period
4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 0
72 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Now, having made the assumption of spreading the cost equally,
we have come to the conclusion that one-fi fth of the cost of the asset
expires annually. Th at portion of the cost of the asset, which is reckoned
to expire during an accounting period, is what is termed as depreciation
expense. Th is also clarifi es that, normally, the total amount of depreciation
on the asset shall not be more than the depreciable cost of the asset. It
is this ‘expense’ which is matched against the revenues of a period, for
determining the profi t.
From Example 7, based on the assumptions made, we can easily
determine that the profi t per annum is Rs. 1,000, that is, Rs. 5,000 over
the useful life of the asset. To recapitulate, depreciation expense is the cost of
a fi xed asset, written off or matched as expense against the revenues of the
diff erent periods during which the asset is used.
Methods of Depreciation
In Example 7, we assumed that the cost of asset expires uniformly over
its useful life. However, this assumption is not based on any theoretical
construct. Th erefore, it is possible for us to assume any other basis of
expiration. Th e only theoretical basis for these assumptions could be that
the entire cost less any salvage value, must expire over its useful life.
Th ere are diff erent methods for depreciation, which diff er from one
another only on the basis of how the cost should be treated as expiring over
the life of the asset. Essentially, depreciation methods follow either of two
broad approaches, the accelerated approach and the uniform approach.
Methods in which larger amounts are expired during the initial years of
the life of the assets are known as the accelerated methods of depreciation.
Th is method has the backing of the principle of conservatism. Th e level
of uncertainty is higher into the future and hence, expiration of the
cost at the earliest is welcome. Th e other method tries to expire the cost
uniformly over the useful life of the assets and hence, is considered to be
the most easy to follow method. Th is is also the most popular method of
depreciation. We shall briefl y discuss some of the most commonly used
methods. However, in order to understand the methods, we should be
clear about the following ideas:
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 73
Original Cost of the Asset
Th is is the cost incurred in making the asset available for use at the fi rst
instance. Th is amount is specifi ed and known at the time of acquisition
of the asset.
Salvage Value
Th is is the expected recovery or sales value of the asset at the end of its
useful life. Th is value, in most cases, is not known and hence, is to be
estimated. When there is no certainty about the recoverable value at the
end of an asset’s useful life, it is prudent to assume a zero salvage value.
Useful Life
Th is is the expected time period for which the asset is to provide economic
service. It is the period for which the asset can be used for production.
Th is period also is not known with any certainty at the time when the
asset is acquired. Th is is usually estimated on the basis of experience or
technical factors.
Depreciable Cost
Th is is the original cost of the asset, less its salvage value. Th is is the
amount of expense the enterprise will be incurring on account of the
expired costs of the fi xed asset, over its useful or economic life.
Book Value
Th e written down value of the asset at any point of time, is its original cost,
less depreciation to date (commonly known as, accumulated depreciation).
74 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Th is is also referred to as the written down value or remaining book value.
Th is is the value at which assets are recorded in the balance sheet.
While there are many ways to provide depreciation1, we list the two
most popular ones in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1 Depreciation Methods
Straight Line/Fixed Method
Under this method, a fi xed percentage of the original cost of the asset is
depreciated each year till the asset value becomes nil. Let us understand
the concept with the help of Example 8.
Example 8: Rahul Traders
Assume that Rahul Traders acquire a machine at the beginning of
operations, at Rs. 10,000. It is expected that the machine will last 10 years
and will have no salvage value at the end of its useful life. Th e machine
needs to be depreciated using the straight line method of depreciation.
1Th e various methods of depreciation has already been discussed in the book How to Read a
Balance Sheet.
Depreciation
Accelerated
Approach
Uniform
Approach
Diminishing or
Written Down
Value
Straight Line
or Fixed
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 75
Th e assumption under the straight-line method is that the cost of the
equipment expires uniformly over time.2 Th e depreciation every year for
the machine under the straight-line method will be 1/10 or 10 percent
of the cost of the asset. Annual depreciation, therefore, will be Rs. 1,000
(being Rs. 10,000/10). Th e written down value at the end of the fi rst year
will be Rs. 10,000 less Rs. 1,000 = Rs. 9,000.
Since, the depreciation will remain constant throughout the lifetime
of the machine, the second year depreciation will also be Rs. 1,000 and
at the end of the second year, the written down value of the machine will
be Rs. 10,000 less (1,000 + 1,000) or (9,000 less 1,000) = Rs. 8,000, and
so on. Th e book value will become zero at the end of 10 years. Table 9.3
shows the annual depreciation, accumulated depreciation and remaining
book value of the asset during its useful life.
Table 9.3 Depreciation @ 10% Per Annum: Straight Line Method
Year Cost
Annual
depreciation
Accumulated
depreciation
Remaining
book value
0 10000
1 10000 1000 1000 9000
2 10000 1000 2000 8000
3 10000 1000 3000 7000
4 10000 1000 4000 6000
5 10000 1000 5000 5000
6 10000 1000 6000 4000
7 10000 1000 7000 3000
8 10000 1000 8000 2000
9 10000 1000 9000 1000
10 10000 1000 10000 0
Figure 9.2 graphically represents the outcome of straight-line
depreciation over the useful life of the asset. Th e graph illustrates the
annual depreciation as a straight line (which runs parallel to its base line),
hence, the name straight-line method of depreciation.
2It works out to be depreciable cost divided by the estimated life of the asset. Th e depreciable cost
is equal to the original cost of the equipment less its salvage value.
76 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Figure 9.2 Annual Depreciation Charge @ 10% Per Annum:
Straight Line Method
Th e accumulated depreciation (total depreciation charged till date)
will increase annually, at a uniform rate, becoming equal to the depreciable
cost of the asset at the end of its useful life. As shown in Figure 9.2, it is a
straight line sloping upward to the right from origin whereas, the written
down value steadily declines to become zero at the end of the useful life of
the asset, hence, a downward sloping straight line, reaching origin at the
end of its useful life.
Diminishing Balance/Written Down Value Depreciation
Under the written down value (W.D.V.)/diminishing balance /reducing
balance method, the depreciation for each year is calculated as a fi xed
percentage of the balance fi gure of the asset brought forward from the
previous year. Depreciation is taken as a certain rate, and it is applied to
the written down value of the asset as, at the beginning of each year. Th e
eff ect of this method is that the amount of depreciation charged every
year is an amount less than that in the previous year. Th is is due to the
fact that the expiration reduces the value of the asset and the same rate
of expiration is applied to the net value of the asset at the beginning of
each year. Th is results in lower amounts of depreciation during successive
years. Th e assumption is that the amount of expiration of the cost of the
asset is higher during the initial years. (If you feel confused, then do not
worry, a detailed example at the end of the section will make it clearer.)
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 77
In the WDV method, we need to decide on a depreciation rate
in advance. Usually, it is taken to be twice the rate of straight-line
depreciation.3 We carry the example of Rahul Traders further to show
the calculation of depreciation using the WDV Method at the rate of 20
percent.
Table 9.4 Depreciation @ 20% Per Annum:
Written Down Value Method
Year
Original
cost
Annual
depreciation
Accumulated
depreciation
Remaining
book value
0 10000 10000
1 10000 2000 2000 8000
2 10000 1600 3600 6400
3 10000 1280 4880 5120
4 10000 1024 5904 4096
5 10000 819 6723 3277
6 10000 655 7379 2621
7 10000 524 7903 2097
8 10000 419 8322 1678
9 10000 336 8658 1342
10 10000 268 8926 1074
Th e non-allocated portion of the cost is usually charged as depreciation
in the last year of the life of the asset. Since there is no salvage value for
the asset at the end of its useful life, the terminal year depreciation will be
taken as Rs. 1,342, that is, Rs. 268 (the depreciation for the period) plus
Rs. 1074 (the terminal value of the asset).
Annual depreciation under the written down value method is the
highest during the fi rst year and goes on reducing over the subsequent
years. Th is is shown by a rapidly declining curve in Figure 9.3. However,
3One interesting observation to be made here is that while in the straight-line method of charging
depreciation, the asset value will eventually reduce to zero; such a scenario is not at all possible
in the diminishing balance method. Th is is because the depreciation is charged as a percentage of
previous year fi gures and hence it will always be lower than the value of the asset. So, will not the
asset ever cease to exist? To take care of such a problem, the remaining value of an asset is generally
depreciated at a single go in its last year to bring its value down to zero and consequently remove
it from the balance sheet. Th e remainder, at the end of the period, is considered to be the terminal
depreciation (total cost of the asset minus depreciation charged till date) during the last year of
the life of the asset, when no salvage value is expected. Otherwise the residual is considered as the
salvage value.
78 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
the rate of decline reduces as the number of years approaches the end of
the life of the asset. Th e accumulated depreciation, similarly, increases at a
rapid rate during the initial years and the rate of increase declines in later
years. Th e remaining book value of the asset is a declining curve.
Figure 9.3 Annual Depreciation Charge @ 20% Per Annum:
Written Down Value Method
Intangible Assets and Amortization
Several times, business enterprises acquire intangible long-term assets,
such as patent rights, distribution rights or copyrights, by paying large
sums of money. So, intangible assets also represent unexpired costs and
need to be accounted for their decrease in the future economic utility
accordingly. Th e method we use to slowly expire intangible assets is
known as amortization. Hence, we can take amortization to mean the
depreciation of the intangible assets.
Intangible assets are a lot more diffi cult to be identifi ed or verifi ed.
So, in order to simplify their accounting, it is usual practice to amortize
intangible assets on a straight-line basis. Since it is diffi cult to determine
the useful life of intangible assets in many cases, they are amortized over a
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 79
reasonably short period. Th is decision is irrespective of the fact that some
of these intangible assets may have a much longer legal life.
Depletion
Another concept related to depreciation and amortization is depletion.
Depletion is applicable if a company has some wasting asset, usually
natural resources (oil reserve or mineral ore deposits). For example, a coal
mine, wherein the asset value keeps on decreasing with use or passage of
time. In such a case, the depreciation charged will be proportionate to the
percentage of asset used up or wasted. For example, let us suppose a coal
mine that has a 100,000 tonne capacity and a value of Rs. 1,000,000.
Th en, if in the fi rst year, a total of 15,000 tonne of coal is mined, then
the depreciation charged would be Rs. 1,000,000 × (15,000/100,000) =
Rs. 150,000.
Depreciation and Profit Measurement
What we have learnt from discussion of the depreciation methods is that,
depending on the method used for charging depreciation or recognition
of expiration of the cost of the fi xed assets, we have a diff erent amount
of charge for annual depreciation. It could also be noticed that over the
entire life of the asset, the total amount of depreciation charge cannot
be diff erent from the depreciable cost of the asset. Th us, the diff erence is
only in terms of the annual apportionment. Th e net eff ect of the methods
is therefore, in terms of showing less or more profi t in any particular year.
Th is can be demonstrated by continuing with our earlier illustration.
Example 8: Rahul Traders…continued
Assume that the company using the machine in our earlier illustration earns Rs.
5,000 per annum in earnings before depreciation. Th e diff erence in the annual
80 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
measurement of profi t under the straight-line and written down value methods
is illustrated in Table 9.5.
Table 9.5 Profi t Measurement under Different Depreciation Methods
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Year
Earnings
before
depreciation
Depreciation Profi t
Straightline
W.D.V.
Straightline
W.D.V.
0
1 5,000 1,000 2000 4000 3000
2 5,000 1,000 1600 4000 3400
3 5,000 1,000 1280 4000 3720
4 5,000 1,000 1024 4000 3976
5 5,000 1,000 819 4000 4181
6 5,000 1,000 655 4000 4345
7 5,000 1,000 524 4000 4476
8 5,000 1,000 419 4000 4581
9 5,000 1,000 336 4000 4664
10 5,000 1,000 269+1,0741 4000 3657
Total 50,000 10,000 10,000 40,000 40,000
Table 9.5 and related discussion gives us some important insights. One
of the important lessons is that any particular method of depreciation has
no eff ect on the income measurement of the business over its entire life.
However, diff erent methods of depreciation will produce diff erent profi t
fi gures on a year-to-year basis. It is not diffi cult to fi nd an explanation for
this variation.
1Includes the non-allocated depreciation charge of Rs. 1,074 since there is no salvage value for the
fi xed asset; under this method, there will always be a terminal unabsorbed depreciation. All fi gures
are rounded off .
Depreciation, Amortization and Depletion 81
Difference: Depreciation, Amortization
and Depletion
Frequently, we come across the question of the diff erences between
depreciation, amortization and depletion. We provide a summary in
Box 9.1.
Box 9.1 Summary
Depreciation is a measure of wearing out, consumption or other loss
of value of a depreciable asset, arising from use, effl uxion of time or
obsolescence through technology and market changes. It is allocated
so as to charge a fair proportion in each accounting period, during
the useful life of the asset. Depreciation expense is applicable on
all tangible long-term assets, whose useful life is pre-determined.
For example, the depreciation expense on movable and immovable
machineries in a service industry, such as air cargo services.
Depletion charge is a measure of exhaustion of a wasting asset,
represented by a periodic write-off of the cost or other substituted
value. For example, depletion charge of using a mine of iron ore and
coal, by a steel manufacturer owning those mines.
Amortization is the gradual and systematic writing-off of an
intangible long-term asset over an appropriate period. For example,
amortization of business restructuring expenses and software
implementation expenses, by a large banking fi rm.
Example 1: Rewanchal Software
The following are the list of transactions for Rewanchal Software Limited
(RSL):
􀀁 On March 1, Rewanchal and others invest Rs. 50,000 in cash in
RSL.
􀀁 On March 2, Rewanchal took a loan of Rs. 20,000 from Venugopal
for RSL. Being a nice friend, Venugopal does not demand any
interest on the loan amount and asks it to be repaid in six months
time.
􀀁 On March 3, RSL purchased for cash two computers, each costing
Rs. 29,000.
􀀁 On March 4, RSL purchased supplies especially stationery for Rs.
6,000 on credit.
􀀁 On March 19, RSL completes its maiden sale of software to a retail
store and receives a price of Rs. 12,000.
􀀁 On March 21, RSL pays Rs. 2,000 to its creditors for supplies.
􀀁 On March 29, RSL pays salaries to its employees, amounting to Rs.
4,000 and as offi ce rent Rs. 1,200.
􀀁 On March 30, RSL delivers a software package for a shoe shop. Th e
customer agrees to pay the price of Rs. 8,000 a week later.
􀀁 On March 31, Rewanchal withdraws Rs. 3,500 for its personal
use.
Solved Illustrations
10
C H A P T E R
Solved Illustrations 83
At the end of the month you are required to prepare its income
statement.
Solution
􀀁 Th e fi rst transaction wherein, Rewanchal and others invest Rs. 50,000
in cash in RSL would not infl uence the income statement.
􀀁 Th e second transaction involves, RSL taking a loan of Rs. 20,000
from Venugopal. Since, an income statement is prepared to record
the changes to an organization’s owners’ equity (due to its business
operations) there would be no aff ect on the income statement.
􀀁 Similarly, the transactions involving RSL purchasing two computers
and also some supplies would not change the income statement.
􀀁 The next transaction on March 19, wherein RSL completes its
maiden sale of software to a retail store and receives a price of Rs.
12,000 would result in the income statement having a sale of a similar
amount.
􀀁 RSL pays Rs. 2,000 to its creditors for supplies. Th is transaction would
lead to a change in the cash position of the company but would not
lead to any change in its income statement.
􀀁 On March 29, RSL pays salaries to its employees, amounting to Rs.
4,000 and as offi ce rent Rs. 1,200. Assuming these payments are for
the whole month, would result in the expense side of the income
statement consisting of these two items.
􀀁 RSL delivers a software package for a shoe shop worth Rs. 8,000 and
the customer agrees to pay the price a week later. Th e result of this
transaction would be an increase in the revenue of the company by a
similar amount.
􀀁 On March 31, the owner withdraws Rs. 3,500 from the profi ts of the
company. We consider the same to be dividend.
A result of all these transactions would be the following income
statement (Table 10.1) for RSL:
84 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 10.1 Profi t and Loss Account of Rewanchal Software Limited
for the Period March 1–31
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Particulars Amount (Rs.) Particulars Amount (Rs.)
Rent expense 1,200 Sales net 20,000
Salaries expense 4,000
Operating profi t 14,800
Interest expense 0 Operating profi t 14,800
Net profi t 14,800
Withdrawals (or
dividends) 3,500
Net profi t 14,800
Retained earnings
to balance sheet 11,300
Matching principle states that we need to adjust the above fi gures
for the depreciation in the fi xed assets (having made use of them for 25
days). Also, we need to take stock of the remaining stationery and other
supplies for necessary adjustments. For example, if we were to decide
on depreciation of the computers by Rs. 1,700 (assumption) and also
found that supplies worth Rs. 2,300 were to be consumed by RSL, this
would have resulted in the income statement (Table 10.2) being restated
as follows:
Table 10.2 Profi t and Loss Account of Rewanchal Software Limited
for the Period March 1–31
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Rent expense 1,200 Sales net 20,000
Salaries expense 4,000
Depreciation expense 1,700
Supplies consumed 2,300
Operating profi t 10,800
Interest expense 0 Operating profi t 10,800
Net profi t 10,800
Withdrawals (or dividends) 3,500 Net profi t 10,800
Surplus carried to the
balance sheet (or retained
earnings to balance sheet) 7,300
Solved Illustrations 85
Example 2: Mitu & Tikan Textiles
From the following information provided for the year ending by Mitu
& Tikan Textiles, prepare a profi t and loss account for the fi nancial year
2009:
Capital Employed 200,000 Opening Stock 60,000
Machinery Purchased 100,000 Furniture 50,000
Cash Purchases for the Year 175,000 Cash Sales 305,000
Payable to suppliers of material 25,000 Adv. Expenses 5,000
Credit Sales for the Year 15,000 Discount allowed 5,000
Cash Discount on purchases 15,000 Closing Stock 15,000
Salary Paid 25,000 Receivable from
Credit Purchases for the year 25,000 customers 15,000
Solution
Th is is a problem which will be solved by identifying the individual items
and allocating them to the appropriate side of either the balance sheet or
income summary in the following manner:
􀀁 Capital employed is not considered in the preparation of the profi t
and loss account, as we have seen in the previous chapter that it is a
balance sheet item. Similar is the case of machinery purchased and
furniture (both would be part of assets).
􀀁 As explained in this chapter, purchases include all purchases, whether
on cash or on credit. Th e amount payable to the supplier of raw
materials is shown in the balance sheet as sundry creditors (or trade
payables). Hence, purchases for the year amount to Rs. 200,000
(cash purchases Rs. 175,000 plus credit purchases Rs. 25,000).
􀀁 Similarly, sales include the total amount of sales for cash as well as
credit. Th e amount receivable from customers is shown in the balance
sheet as sundry debtors, as a part of the current assets. Th us,
the sales for the year are Rs. 320,000 (cash sales Rs. 305,000 and
credit sales Rs. 15,000).
86 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
􀀁 Discount allowed is an expense for the business, and so it is charged
against the revenue for the period.1
􀀁 Similarly, discount received is a benefi t enjoyed by the business and
it can be treated as revenue for the period.2
Now, we are in a position to prepare the profi t and loss account for
Mitu & Tikan Textiles (Table 10.3).
Table 10.3 Profi t and Loss Account of Mitu & Tikan Textiles for the
Year Ending December 31, 2009
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
To opening stock 60,000 By sales during the year 320,000
To purchases for the year 200,000 By discount received 15,000
To discount allowed 5,000 By closing stock 15,000
To salary 25,000
To advertisement expenses 5,000
To profi t for the year 55,000
Total 350,000 Total 350,000
Example 3: Chandu
Chandu runs a small manufacturing unit. He maintains books of accounts
according to the traditional system, being used by him since years. See
Table 10.4 for particulars from his books as on March 31, 2009.
Table 10.4 Chandu’s Book of Accounts
Particulars Rs. (as on April 1, 2008) Rs. (as on March 31, 2009)
Fixed assets block 200,000 180,000
Debtors (receivables) — 50,000
Cash and bank balance 10,000 15,000
Stock 40,000 45,000
Creditors 15,000 5,000
1Alternatively, it can be shown as a reduction from the sales. In that case, net sales amount
would be Rs. 315,000 (that is, 320,000 – 5,000).
2Alternatively, it can be shown as a reduction from the total purchases for the period, making
the amount of net purchases to be Rs. 185,000 (i.e., Rs. 200,000 – Rs. 15,000). Readers
can calculate and verify that in both the alternative treatments, net profi t of the business will
remain the same.
Solved Illustrations 87
While talking to Chandu, we also note the following points:
􀀁 Depreciation on the fi xed assets can be pegged at the rate of 10
percent per accounting year.
􀀁 Bad debts (due to credit sales) for the period were identifi ed as
Rs. 5,000. Chandu also informed us that we would need to provide
a 2 percent provision for bad and doubtful debts.
􀀁 Wages paid during the period were Rs. 15,000 and salary paid was
Rs. 20,000.
􀀁 During the period, prepaid salaries were Rs. 1,000 and wages outstanding,
Rs. 1,500.
􀀁 Purchases and sales for the period were Rs. 150,000 and Rs. 225,000
respectively. All the purchases and sales were done on credit basis.
􀀁 Interest on short-term deposits was Rs. 15,000.
You are required to prepare an income statement for the year ending
March 31, 2009.
Solution
Th is problem requires the reader to identify the items pertaining to the
profi t and loss account and thereon, tackle them. Th e problem can be
worked out properly if we divide all the items into two groups, that is,
trading account and the rest of the profi t and loss account items. We
have seen that a trading account is a fi nancial statement displaying the
sales, cost of those sales and gross profi t arising during the period of that
account. Further, the rest of the profi t and loss account starts from the
gross profi t and ends with net profi t or loss for the period by adjusting
the expenses incurred and other items during the period of the account.
Accordingly, the two accounts can be prepared as in Tables 10.5 and
10.6.
88 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
Table 10.5 Trading Account of Chandu for the Year Ended March 31, 2009
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
To opening stock 40,000 By sales 225,000
To purchases 150,000 By closing stock 45,000
To wages 15,000
Add: outstanding wages* 1,500
To gross profi t 63,500
Total 270,000 Total 270,000
*Wages outstanding are related to the current period only. Hence, it is charged against
the revenue of the related period.
Table 10.6 Other Items of Profi t and Loss Account of Chandu for the
Year Ended March 31, 2009
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
To depreciation 20,000 By gross profi t 63,500
To bad debts 5,000 By interest income 15,000
To provision for bad debts* 1,000
To salary paid 20,000
Less: Prepaid salary** 1,000 19,000
To net profi t 33,500
Total 78,500 Total 78,500
* Debtors on 31.03.2009 = Rs. 50,000; Provision for bad debts = 2% of Rs. 50,000 =
Rs. 50,000 = Re. 1
** Prepaid salary pertains to the next accounting period. Hence, the total amount of
salary paid is reduced with the amount of salary prepaid to follow the matching concept.
Often, we come across the fi nancial statements of non-for-profi t
entities such as a club or a trust––in such a case the format of fi nancial
statements is slightly diff erent. We capture the same using Example 4.
Example 4: Bombay Club
Table 10.7 shows the receipts and payments account of Bombay Club for
the year ended March 31, 2009.
Solved Illustrations 89
Table 10.7 Receipts and Payments Account of Bombay Club for the
Year Ended March 31, 2009
Receipts Payments
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Opening bank balance 15,000 Furniture purchased 20,000
Loan from Malcolm D’souza 10,000 Insurance premium paid 5,000
Membership fee received* 55,000 Salary paid 19,500
Entrance fee received 18,000 Rent paid 12,000
Proceeds from sale of
investments 125,000
Electricity paid 2,000
Printing and stationery 1,850
Sundry expenses 3,000
Closing bank balance 159,650
Total 223,000 Total 223,000
*Membership fees of Rs. 55,000 consisted of the following:
Previous dues of membership fees:
Membership fees for the year:
Advance membership for the next year:
Rs. 5,000
Rs. 40,000
Rs. 10,000
Th e additional information provided to you is
31-03-2008 31-03-2009
􀀁 Rent outstanding Rs. 1,200 Rs. 2,400
􀀁 Membership fees (not received) Rs. 5,000 —
􀀁 Cost of investments sold Rs. 20,000. Th ese investments were
purchased long back (before FY2008).
􀀁 Loan was taken from Malcolm on June 30, 2008, on interest of 10
percent per annum.
􀀁 Value of furniture on March 31, 2008, was Rs. 16,000. It is noted
that new furniture was purchased on June 30, 2008. Depreciation
on furniture is to be provided at 20 percent per annum.
􀀁 Th e accounting policy of the club provides that 30 percent of
the entrance fee is to be treated as revenue and the balance be
capitalised.
􀀁 Th e capital and other funds balance as on March 31,2008, is
Rs. 54,800.
90 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
You are required to prepare a balance sheet as on March 31,2008,
income and expenditure account for the period ended March 31, 2009,
and a balance sheet as on that date.
Solution
Th is is a complicated problem but it refl ects situations usually faced by
fi nance executives. It can be solved in various ways. We illustrate one
way of cracking the problem. It involves preparing the balance sheet of
Bombay Club for FY2008 and then working on the fi nancial statements
of FY2009 by deciphering information given in the problem.
In the previous chapter, we have seen the way in which a balance sheet
is prepared. We use the same method here. Based on the information
provided we can say that the amount of fee due but not received at the
end of the year is a current asset (receivable). Similarly, the bank balance,
furniture, and investments would be part of the assets side of the balance
sheet. Regarding other items, we know that the amount of rent payable is
a current liability, so it is included under the head liabilities. In addition,
capital and other funds would also be part of the liabilities side of the
balance sheet. Th e opening balance sheet is, thus, presented in Table 10.8.
Table 10.8 Bombay Club Balance Sheet as on March 31, 2008
Assets
Amount
(Rs.)
Liabilities
Amount
(Rs.)
Current assets Current liabilities
Bank balance 15,000 Outstanding rent 1,200
Membership fee receivable 5,000
Non-current assets
Investments 20,000 Owner’s equity and funds
Furniture 16,000 Capital and other funds 54,800
Total assets 56,000
Total liabilities and
owner’s equity
56,000
Now, let us consider the following revenue items which eff ect the
income and expenditure statement of the current year:
􀀁 Total rent paid during FY2009 is Rs. 12,000. We know that out of
this, an amount equal to 1,200 relates to the previous year, as the
same amount was outstanding as on March 31,2008. Further, the
Solved Illustrations 91
amount of rent outstanding as on March 31,2009––Rs. 2,400––is
the rent payable and hence, pertains to the current period. Th erefore,
the actual rent for the year 2009 is Rs. 13,200 {Rs. 12,000 – (Rs.
1,200 + Rs. 2,400)}.
or
Rent paid = Rs. 12,000
Add: Current year outstanding = Rs. 2,400
Less: Last year outstanding = Rs. 1,200
= Rs. 13,200
􀀁 Th e accounting policy of the club states that 30 percent of the
entrance fee is to be treated as revenue and the balance is capitalised.
As a result, 30 percent of Rs. 18,000 (or Rs. 5,400) is to be
considered as revenue and the balance 70 percent (or Rs. 12,600) is
to be capitalised and added in capital and other funds.
􀀁 Depreciation on furniture is calculated as follows:
On opening balance (for 12 months) 16,000 × 20% = Rs. 3,200
On purchases during the year (nine months) 20,000 ×
20% × 9/12 = Rs. 3,000
Total Rs. 6,200
􀀁 Interest on loan is calculated for a period of nine months at 10
percent per annum. Since the amount is related to the current
period, it is treated as an expense and as the amount is yet to be
paid; it is also taken to the balance sheet as a current liability.
Now, the income and expenditure account of Bombay Club for the
year ended March 31, 2009, is presented in Table 10.9.
Table 10.9 Bombay Club Income and Expenditure Account for the
Period March 31, 2009
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
Particulars
Amount
(Rs.)
To salary 19,500 By entrance fee (30% revenue) 5,400
To rent 13,200 By profi t on sale of investment 105,000
To electricity 2,000 By membership fee 40,000
To printing and stationery 1,850
92 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
To sundry expenses 3,000
To insurance paid 5,000
To depreciation 6,200
To interest payable 750
Excess of income over
expenditure* 98,900
Total 150,400 Total 150,400
􀀁 Th e excess of income over expenditure is the balancing fi gure. It is
similar to net profi t.
After preparing the income and expenditure account, we can prepare
the balance sheet without any diffi culty, in Table 10.10.
Table 10.10 Bombay Club Balance Sheet as on March 31, 2009
(All fi gures in Rs.)
Assets
Amount
(Rs.)
Liabilities
Amount
(Rs.)
Current assets Current liabilities
Bank balance 159,650 Rent payable 2,400
Interest payable (on loan) 750
Advance membership fees 10,000
Long-term liabilities
Loan 10,000
Non-current assets Owners equity and funds
Furniture
Opening balance
Rs. 16,000
Add: Purchases
Rs. 20,000
Total gross furniture
Rs. 36,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Rs. 6,200
29,800 Capital and other funds
Opening balance
Rs. 54,800
Add: Entrance fee
Rs. 12,600 67,400
Surplus 98,900
Total assets 189,450
Total liabilities and
owner’s equity
189,450
It would be a good idea to re-read Table 10.10 and mull over the
various solutions.
Summary
In this book, we developed and examined the income statement.
Th is statement shows net profi t or earnings generated by a company
during an accounting period. Th is statement, to sum up, measures the
management’s contribution during an accounting period by showing the
income generated from the assets.
Th e profi t and loss account summarizes the revenues and expenses of
an accounting period. As a result of this summary, it shows net profi t or
net loss earned or suff ered by a company during the period. Th e reader of
this account gets an idea of the cost structure and profi tability during the
accounting period.
Exercises
Th e net profi t, after payment of dividends, shows the amount retained
and hence, links the balance sheet with the profi t and loss account.
1. Answer the following by fi lling in the blanks.
1.1 Th e profi t and loss account is a summary of _______ and _______
for an accounting period.
1.2 Realization in accounting is the basis of __________ recognition.
1.3 Income measurement is achieved by matching _________ to
_________.
Summary and Exercises
94 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
1.4 Costs relating to realized revenues are considered as ___________.
1.5 Recognised revenue ______________ the owner(s)’ equity.
1.6 Expenses result in _____________ of the owner(s)’ equity.
1.7 Expenses could be recognised in relation to __________ realized or
a ______ ________ of accounting period.
1.8 Resources received for sale of goods or services are referred to as
_______________.
1.9 Resources used up in producing goods or services are called
_______________.
1.10 Wages are an example of _________________.
2. Multiple Choice Questions.
2.1 Goods Purchased – Rs 10,000, Sales Rs 9,000 Margin 20% on cost.
Closing Stock - ?
(a) (1,000) (b) 1,000
(c) 2,500 (d) 2,800
2.2 If the opening inventory is understated and the closing inventory is
overstated, the profi t would:
(a) Increase (b) Decrease
(c) No Change (d) None
2.3 Inventories consist of:
(a) Raw Materials (b) Work-in-Progress
(c) Finished Goods (d) All of the above
2.4 On which principle will the determination of expenses for the accounting
period depend?
(a) Periodicity (b) Matching
(c) Realization (d) Accrual
2.5 Revenue from sale of a product is generally, realized when:
(a) Sale is made (b) It is Manufactured
(c) Cash is collected (d) It is Delivered
2.6 Th e depletion method of depreciation is adopted on:
(a) Land & Building (b) Computers
(c) Goodwill (d) Mines & Quarries
Summary and Exercises 95
2.7 Which among the followings is assumed to be non-depreciating?
(a) Land (b) Goodwill
(c) Cash (d) Plant & Machinery
2.8 Owners’ Equity would change as a result of:
(a) Decrease of Creditors (b) Payment of salaries & wages
(c) Increase of Debtors (d) Purchase of Fixed Assets
3. Relate items in column A to all items in column B.
Table 11.1
A B
a. Depreciation expense 1) An appropriation of profi ts.
b. Gross sales 2) Unexpired cost of the period
c. Sales returns/allowances 3) Invoice notation, “2/15, n/30”
d. Prepaid expense 4) Adjustments to recorded sales.
e. Discounts 5) Invoice value goods sold during
the period.
f. Give effect on return of goods by
customers.
6) Reduction from invoice price.
g. Dividends 7) Expiration of cost of fi xed assets.
4. Classify each item listed in column A into one of the following categories
– (a) Operating revenue (b) Non-operating revenue (c) Cost of goods
sold (d) Selling and distribution expense (e) General administrative
expense (f ) Appropriation of profi t and (g) Not related to profi t and
loss account, by appropriately marking them in column B. Assume that
the information relates to a small manufacturing fi rm.
Table 11.2 Classifi cation of Items
A B
Raw material consumed
Interest received
Dividends received
Wages paid to manufacturing workers
Carriage on goods sold
Carriage on goods purchased
Salary of clerical staff
Rent for offi ce
Power and fuel
96 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
A B
Selling agents commission
Advertising
Auditor(s) fees
Sales tax
Municipal rates on offi ce premises
Profi t on sale of fi xed assets
Power used in administrative offi ce
Sales discount
Purchase returns and allowances
Dividends paid
Interest expense on loans
5. Shyam’s Enterprise
Table 11.3 shows the summarized profi t and loss account of Shyam’s
Enterprise for five consecutive periods. Complete the same by
supplying the missing information.
Table 11.3 Summarized Profi t and Loss Account of Shyam’s Enterprise
(Figures in Rs. ‘000’s)
Year → 1 2 3 4 5
Sales 1000 ? 3000 ? 5000
Cost of goods sold 500 800 ? 2500 3000
Gross profi t ? 700 1000 1500 ?
Administrative expenses 100 ? 400 400 ?
Selling and distribution 150 200 ? 500 600
Operating profi t ? 200 400 ? 1000
Other income 150 ? 200 ? 500
Net profi t before tax ? 300 ? 1000 ?
Provision for corporate tax 200 ? 300 ? 750
Profi t after tax ? 200 ? 500 ?
Dividend 50 ? 10 ? ?
Surplus to retained earnings
(that is, balance sheet)
? 100 ? 50 500
6. Shantanu Real Estate Brokers
Th e summary fi nancial data for each transaction of Shantanu Real
Estate Brokers are presented in Table 11.4 in the extended balance
sheet equation form. Describe the possible transactions for each
entry.
Summary and Exercises 97
Table 11.4 Transactions of Shantanu Real Estate Brokers
(Figures in Rs. ‘000’s)
Cash +
Accounts
receivable +
Offi ce
furniture
= Accounts
payable
+ Shantanu,
capital
(i) 100 100
(ii) 200 200
(iii) – 50 + 250 200
(iv) + 600 + 600
(v) – 100 – 100
(vi) – 200 – 200
(vii) +200 +200
(viii) +100 +100 +200
(ix) +150 –150
(x) – 200 – 200
(xi) – 100 – 100
7. Profi t and loss account of Infosys Technologies Limited
In Chapter 5, we gave a brief idea into the performance of Infosys
Technologies Limited, one of the largest software giants in India, for
the fi nancial year 2009. Based on the same, please mark whether the
following statements in Table 11.5 are true or false by marking ‘T’ or
‘F’ opposite each statement.
Table 11.5 Performance of Infosys in FY 2009
7.1 In FY2009, Infosys reserves and surplus jumped by 33 percent on
a year-on-year basis (approximately).
(T/F)
7.2 In FY2009, due to severe global economic recession, Infosys
made a loss.
(T/F)
7.3 In FY2009, approximately Rs. 26 was distributed by Infosys to its
shareholders for every Rs. 100 earned.
(T/F)
7.4 Infosys was able to earn Rs. 28.72 for every Rs. 100 worth of sale
made by it in FY2009 (note: this measure is also known as net
profi t margin).
(T/F)
7.5 The company decided to reinvest 64 percent of its earnings during
FY2009.
(T/F)
8. Trends in income statement of ACC Limited
In Chapter 4, we introduced you to the income statement of ACC
Limited (formerly, the Associated Cement Companies Limited),
India’s oldest and largest cement manufacturer. Based on the income
98 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
statements provided therein (from FY2006 to FY2008), please mark
whether the following statements in Table 11.6 are true or false by
marking ‘T’ or ‘F’ opposite each statement.
Table 11.6 Performance of ACC Limited
8.1 While sales of ACC increased in both years (FY2007 and FY2008,
on a year-on-year basis), the company’s net profi t did not show
the same trend.
(T/F)
8.2 Looking at all the components of ACC’s income statement, we can
say that ‘other income’ of ACC had the biggest jump from FY2006
to FY2008 (in percentage terms).
(T/F)
8.3 If gross profi t margin is defi ned as gross profi t dividend by net
sales then one could say that ACC had a gross margin of above
50 percent for all the three years.
(T/F)
8.4 In FY2008, ACC’s operating expenses (especially other expenses)
increased signifi cantly resulting in a fall in its operating profi ts
(compared to its previous years).
(T/F)
8.5 In FY2007, ACC’s sales discounts and sales returns decreased
(on a year-on-year basis).
(T/F)
8.6 The company’s depreciation expenses have been consistently
increasing.
(T/F)
8.7 The company’s interest expenses have been consistently
decreasing.
(T/F)
8.8 The net profi t margin of the company (defi ned as net profi t divided
by gross revenue) has been consistently decreasing.
(T/F)
Keys
1. Fill in the blanks:
1.1 Revenues, Expense
1.2 Revenue
1.3 Expenses, Realized Revenues of the Period
1.4 Expenses
1.5 Increases
1.6 Decreases
1.7 Revenues, Cost Expiration
1.8 Revenue
1.9 Assets
1.10 Expense
Summary and Exercises 99
2. Keys:
2.1 (c)
2.2 (a)
2.3 (d)
2.4 (b)
2.5 (a)
2.6 (d)
2.7 (a) & (c)
2.8 (b)
3. Match the following (we pick the best fi t):
Column A → Column B
A → 7
B → 5
C → 3
D → 2
E → 6
F → 4
G → 1
4. Classify the items:
Column A Column B
Raw material consumed C
Interest received B
Dividends received B
Wages paid to manufacturing workers C
Carriage on goods sold D
Carriage on goods purchased B
Salary of clerical staff E
Rent for offi ce E
Power and fuel C
Selling agent’s commission D
Advertising D
Auditors fees E
Sales tax A
Municipal rates on offi ce premises E
Profi t on sale of fi xed assets B
Power used in administrative offi ce E
Sales discount G
Purchase returns and allowances C
Dividends paid F
Interest expense on loans Financial expenses
100 How to Read a Profi t and Loss Statement
5. Shyam’s Enterprise
Year → 1 2 3 4 5
Sales 1500 4000
Cost of goods sold 2000
Gross Profi t 500 2000
Administrative expenses 400 400
Selling and distribution 300
Operating Profi t 250 600
Other Income 100 400
Net Profi t before tax 400 600 1500
Provision for Corporate tax 100 500
Profi t after tax 200 300 750
Dividend 100 450 250
Retained earnings 200 400 700 1200 1950
6. Shantanu Real Estate Brokers
Possible transactions:
i. Shantanu contributed Rs. 100,000 as capital to his business. So, the
cash position has increased.
ii. Fixed asset to this business has been shown as Rs. 200,000.
iii. Offi ce furniture worth Rs. 250,000 has been purchased, but only
Rs. 50,000 has been paid through cash. Th e remaining amount,
that is, Rs. 200,000 is on credit.
iv. Shantanu again contributed Rs. 600,000 as capital.
v. An amount of Rs. 100,000 was paid to the creditors. So, the cash
position has decreased.
vi. Shantanu withdraws Rs. 200,000 from the capital account. So, the
cash position has been decreased by an equivalent amount.
vii. Th e fi rm purchased something worth Rs. 200,000 on credit,
viii. Shantanu again contributed Rs. 200,000 as capital, but only Rs.
100,000 in cash and rest on agreement for taking service worth Rs.
100,000 from the fi rm.
ix. Rs. 150,000 worth accounts receivables were realized. Hence, the
cash position increased.
x. Shantanu withdraws Rs. 200,000 from capital account.
xi. Rs. 100,000 worth accounts payable were settled. Hence, the cash
position decreased.
Summary and Exercises 101
7. Infosys Technologies Ltd
7.1 True
It jumped by 32.71% on a year-on-year basis.
7.2 False
It had a net profi t margin of 28.72%.
7.3 True
Th e dividend paid out was Rs. 25.78 for every Rs. 100 earned.
7.4 True
Th e net profi t margin in 2009 was 28.72%.
7.5 False
Th e company has reinvested 74.22% of its earnings during 2009.
8. ACC Ltd
8.1 True
Sales in 2008 were 5.2% more as compared to 20.7% in 2007,
whereas there was a decrease in profi t in 2008 as compared to profi t
in 2007.
8.2 True
Other income rose by 44.2% in 2007 to 62.7% in 2008.
8.3 True
Th e gross profi t margin was 53.4% in 2008, 57.8% in 2007 and
53.9% in 2006. It ranged between 53% and 58%.
8.4 True
Th e operating profi t in 2006 was 27.3% whereas it was 20.7% in
2008.
8.5 True
It was down by 5.3% in 2007 as compared to Rs. 120.41 Cr in
2006.
8.6 False
It rose by 16.9% in 2007 but declined in 2008 by 3.6%.
8.7 False
It rose by 35.9% in 2007 but declined in 2008 by 45.9%.
8.8 True
Net profi t margin was 21.2% in 2006 and declined to 20.4% in
2007. It further declined to 16.2% in 2008.

A
ACC, 15
Accounting period, 10, 93
Accounting principle, 10
Accounts receivable, 66-67
Accrual principle, 11
Accrual system, 15
Accrued liability, 23
Accumulated depreciation, 73
Amortization, 78, 81
Appropriations, 32-33
Assets, 13, 20, 29, 48-49
Asset expiration, 16
B
Bad debts, 68
Bad debt expense, 67-68
Balance sheet, 3,29, 47
Bharti Airtel, 66
Book value, 73
Index
C
Cash system, 15
Cash discount, 37-38
Cartage, 64
Cheque, 10
Closing stock, 64
Contributed capital, 29, 48-49
Cost expirations, 28
Cost of goods sold, 28, 32, 39
Cost of sale, 28
D
Depletion, 70, 78, 80-81
Depreciable cost, 73
Depreciation, 14, 70, 79, 81
diminishing or written down
value, 74, 76-77, 80
straight line or fixed method,
74-75, 77, 80
Depreciation expense, 42, 70, 72
Diminishing balance method, 74,
76-77, 80
Dividends, 29, 32, 48-49
104 Index
E
EAT, 45
Earnings after tax, 45
Expenses, 3, 4, 20, 23, 34, 48-49
Expired costs, 11, 20, 28
F
FIFO, 52, 54-55
Financial statement, 9
First in fi rst out, see FIFO
Fixed method, 74
G
GAAP Compliance, 15
Gross profi t, 29, 33, 40
H
HUL, 15
I
Income statement, 3, 8, 26, 29, 47
Income summary, see
income statement
Income tax, 44
Indirect expenses, 28
Infosys Technologies Limited,
50-51
Intangible assets, 78
Interest, 33
Interest expense, 43
Inventoriable costs, 21
Inventories, 16
Inventory valuation, 52, 59
FIFO, 52, 54-55
LIFO, 53, 54-55
WAC, 54, 55-55
L
Last in last out, see LIFO
Liabilities, 13, 20, 26, 29, 48
LIFO, 53, 54-55
Long lived assets, 17
M
Manufacturing account, 61
Matching principle, 15
Mro-tek limited, 23
N
Net income, 7, 18
Net profi t, 31, 45
Net profi t before tax, 44
Non-cash resource, 10
Non-operating income, 39
Non-operating expenses, 30n, 33
Non-inventoriable costs, 21-22
Index 105
O
Opening stock, 64
Operating expenses, 33, 40n, 41
Operating profi t, 30, 33, 43
Original cost of the asset, 73
Outstanding liability, 23
Outstanding salary, 23
Owner(s) capital, 12, 25
Owner(s) equity, 12, 13, 20, 26, 47
P
PAT, 31, 33, 45
PBT, 31, 33
PBIT, 31, 33
Personnel expenses, 41
Prepaid expenses, 16, 23
Prepaid rent, 23
Principle of conservatism, 72
Profi t, 18, 20
Profit available for distribution,
32-33
Profit before interest & tax, see
PBIT
Profi t before tax, see PBT
Profi t after tax, see PAT
Profi t and loss account, 8, 26, 33,
48, 65, 93
Profit and loss appropriation
account, 65
Profi t and loss statement, 3
Profi t and loss summary, see profi t
& loss account
Profi t measurement, 79
Promissory notes, 10
R
Realization principle, 10, 11
Reducing balance method, 76
Registrar of companies, 10
Remaining book value, 74
Reserves & surplus, 12, 25
Retained earnings, 32-33, 48-49
Retained profits of the business
entity, 12
Revenues, 3, 4, 11, 19, 23, 34, 48-
49
Revenue account, 25
Right, 10
S
Sales, 19, 32, 35, 37, 64
Sales discount, 37-38
Sales returns and allowances, 36
Salvage value, 71, 73
Straight line depreciation method,
74-75, 77, 80
Sundry debtors, 67
T
Tax, 33
Taxes payable, 23
Turnover, 19
Trade debtors, 67
Trade discount, 38
Trading account, 64
Transfer of reserves, 32
106 Index
U
Unearned revenue, 19
Useful life, 70, 73
V
Videocon Industries, 66
W
WAC, 54-55
WIP, 62
Written down value, 74, 76-77, 80
Weighted average cost, see WAC
Work in progress, see WIP
The Authors’ Profi les
NEELAKANTAN RAMACHANDRAN, Fellow (IIM, Calcutta)
Management Advisory Services, Kochi
Ramachandran has been in academics for the past 35
years. He joined the fi nance faculty of Indian Institute
of Management (IIM), Calcutta, immediately after
completing the doctoral program. Later, he shifted
to Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Bangkok, as
Visiting Professor in 1999 and took up the position
of Chief Internal Auditor from 2002. Currently he
is the principal consultant with Management Advisory Services, Kochi,
Kerala. He has been also associated as a consultant with several projects of
government and non-government agencies in various countries including
India, Th ailand, Laos, Sri Lanka, Cambodia and Vietnam. His areas of
interest include Financial Structure of Industries, Corporate Financial
Accounting and Strategic Cost Management.
RAM KUMAR KAKANI, Fellow (IIM, Calcutta)
Associate Professor, XLRI, Jamshedpur
Kakani has rich experience in both corporate sector
and academics. He joined XLRI, Jamshedpur, in
2001. Earlier, he had also worked as a residential
academic in many international locations including
Copenhagen, Dubai, and Singapore. His research
work has been supported by ABRC of London
Business School and the National Stock Exchange
of India. His recent achievements include being among the top 1% of
SSRN authors’ ranking (2007), co-authoring a few popular text books,
and receiving the 2005 AIMS Best Young Teacher Award. His areas
of interest include Corporate Finance, Corporate Strategy, Financial
Analysis, and Study of Business Groups.